CYBER 99: Foreign Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
CYBER 100: Computer Systems Literacy	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	This is an introductory university-level course in computer systems literacy. The history, architecture and operation of computing systems and underlying computing theory are covered. The intent of this course is to ensure that students with diverse backgrounds can gain the information technology fundamental skills and understanding to succeed with subsequent in-depth courses in the Cybersecurity Analytics and Operations curriculum. At the same time the general nature of the introduction may make it useful for other programs that involve education in concepts and skills relating to information and computing systems.
CYBER 100S: Computer Systems Literacy	3 Credits	This is an introductory university-level course in computer systems literacy. The history, architecture and operation of computing systems and underlying computing theory are covered. The intent of this course is to ensure that students with diverse backgrounds can gain the information technology fundamental skills and understanding to succeed with subsequent in-depth courses in the Cybersecurity Analytics and Operations curriculum. At the same time the general nature of the introduction may make it useful for other programs that involve education in concepts and skills relating to information and computing systems.
CYBER 199: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
CYBER 262: Cyber-Defense Studio	3 Credits	This studio course teaches four basic hands-on cyber-defense skills: configuring a firewall, implementing a host-based intrusion detection software tool, using the Metasploit tool to do penetration testing, and implementing a network intrusion detection tool. The first cyber-defense skill is on configuring an ACL (Access Control List) firewall. This module provides the students with a practical exercise applying their analytical skills to properly configure the ACL of a firewall and to verify the correctness of their firewall configurations. Through this exercise, the students also learn firewall oriented network security policies. The second cyber-defense skill is on implementing a host-based intrusion detection software tool which can detect suspicious user sessions on a computer. This module provides the students with a practical exercise applying their programming skills to solve anomaly detection problems. The third cyber-defense skill is on using the Metasploit tool to do penetration testing. This module provides the students with a practical exercise applying their programming skills to do penetration testing. The fourth cyber-defense skill is on implementing a network intrusion detection software tool which can detect suspicious network flows. This module provides the students with a practical exercise applying their programming skills to solve signature-based intrusion detection problems
CYBER 294: Research Project	3 Credits	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
CYBER 296: Independent Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Creative projects, including research and design, that are supervised on an individual basis and that fall outside the scope of formal courses.
CYBER 297: Special Topics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Formal courses offered infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
CYBER 299: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
CYBER 342W: Cyber Incident Handling and Response	3 Credits	Cyber Incident Handling and Response is an intermediate course appropriate for students who are majoring in Cybersecurity. This course provides the student with the background, experience and perspective that is required to document organizational preparation for cyber incidents, document cyber incident impact and resolution, document response strategies, as well as integrate business continuity planning into the organization. This is a writing intensive course, which requires each student to individually document cyber security incidents and communicate the impact of those incidents to the organization. Peer writing evaluation will help students to consider how effective their written communication skills are. Team writing assignments will provide students will the real-world experience of writing portions of organizational documents such as preparedness documentation, documenting the organization of computer incident response teams, documenting organizational disaster recovery plans, and documenting post-incident recovery plans. Students will receive peer feedback on their writing assignments, as well as direct feedback from the instructor with a goal of improving writing skills and conforming their writing styles to the expectations of organizations and industry.
CYBER 362: Cybersecurity Analytics Studio	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Cyberattacks involve advanced and sophisticated techniques to infiltrate corporate computers, networks and enterprise systems and critical infrastructures. Types of attacks include advanced malware, zero day attacks and advanced persistent threats. Advance warning about attackers and intelligence about the threat landscape is considered by many security leaders to be essential features in cyber-defense. The massive increase in the rate of novel cyberattacks has made data-mining-based analytics techniques a critical component in detecting security threats. Big data analytics in security involves the ability to gather massive amounts of digital information to analyze, visualize and draw insights that can make it possible to predict and stop cyberattacks. This studio course teaches fundamental data-driven cybersecurity analytics skills using programming skills acquired in earlier courses. The course will be divided into three modules. The first module prepares students for security analytics, by refreshing or making them familiar with two popular data analytics programming languages (e.g., R and Python). The second module focuses on understanding the key cybersecurity analytics process including data exploration, data visualization and data preparation and examining popular data mining algorithms such as linear and logistic regression, decision trees, support vector machine, and neural networks and similar techniques for security analytics. In the third module, students use analytics process and methods for selected cybersecurity problems, such as security breaches, ZeroAccess Infection, Log Analytics, Access Analytics and Web Hacking Analytics. Through this studio course, the students will gain concrete understanding of security analytics processes, methodologies and how to apply these concepts and tools to real-world cybersecurity. A major component of the course will be several hands-on exercises and a final team-based project. Hands-on exercises provide students with knowledge, skills and hands-on experience of learning security analytics process and methodologies to address security problems. The team-based project allows students to apply what they have learned to address real world security threat. This course will incorporate collaborative and action-learning experiences wherever appropriate. Emphasis will be placed on developing and practicing writing and speaking skills through application of the concepts, theories and technologies that define the course.
CYBER 366: Malware Analytics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Malware Analytics is an intermediate course required for students who are majoring in Cybersecurity Analytics and Operations. It is a three-credit hands-on course that teaches principles and practice of malware detection, analysis, and defense. The course begins by introducing the foundations of malware, including history, vulnerability, types, analysis methods, and defenses. It then builds on this foundation by teaching students how to address malware issues using analysis techniques such as reverse engineering and static program analysis, as well as how to use analytic approaches such as automatic malware trace classification and clustering. The course relies extensively on hands-on laboratory activities to help students obtain practical experience in malware analysis and analytics. Through this course, the students will gain concrete understandings on principles and practices of malware analysis and defense.
CYBER 399: Foreign Studies	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
CYBER 440: Cybersecurity Capstone	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	Cybersecurity Capstone is an advanced, culminating course for students who are majoring in Cybersecurity. This course provides the student with a practical exercise, designed by the instructor. The initial weeks of the semester provide the student with an overview of several analytic frameworks that are used in cybersecurity shops and organizations. Then, the student reviews specific technical analysis methods in malware, static and dynamic analysis, file system exploration, security log file analysis and network analysis. The findings from these analyses are then integrated into the analytic framework, gaps are identified, further analysis is conducted to fill the gaps. In the final weeks of the semester, students construct a high level briefing that supplies appropriate levels of technical detail to top level executives.
CYBER 494: Research Project	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
CYBER 496: Independent Studies	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Creative projects, including research and design, that are supervised on an individual basis and that fall outside the scope of formal courses.
CYBER 497: Special Topics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Formal courses offered infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
CYBER 499: Foreign Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
IST 97: Special Topics	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
IST 99: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
IST 110: Information, People and Technology	3 Credits	The use, analysis and design of information systems and technologies to organize, coordinate, and inform human enterprises.  
IST 111: Seminar in IST	3 Credits	 Introduction to Information, People and Technology (3) (GS) Information, People and Technology presents the high points of an education in the College of Information Sciences and Technology. It opens an intellectual journey through the ideas and challenges that IT professionals face in the world. It will address major questions such as: How can we use technology to organize and integrate human enterprises? How can technology help people and organizations adapt rapidly and creatively? What can we do about information overload?Three perspectives (or facets) address the core issues: information or the basic science of data encoding, transmission and storage; people or the interactions among technologies, institutions, regulations and users; and technology or the design and operation of basic information technology devices. Students completing the course will be confident users and consumers of information technology. Students will develop research and analytical skills to evaluate specific devices and understand how those devices function in larger socio-technical systems. Students will be able to predict and anticipate the impact of new technologies on human institutions as well as understand the potential impact of institutions on the use and design of information technologies.The course employs an action-oriented approach. Students learn by doing&mdash;formulating and solving problems drawn from professional contexts, detecting and recovering from errors related to technology use, and locating, reading and studying materials that support their analysis and problem-solving. Students will accomplish this by participating in team-based learning. The course provides students with the opportunity to use, modify, and evaluate software to search for, frame, and express ideas with fluency. A variety of mechanisms are used to assess student performance. These evaluation methods typically include exams, quizzes, homework assignments, group projects, and peer and self-assessments.
IST 111S: Seminar in Information Sciences and Technology	3 Credits	 is the introductory course in IST, and, as such, serves as a prerequisite for 200-level (intermediate) IST courses. It is a required course for all majors and minors in IST, and meets requirements for a General Education or Bachelor of Arts Social Science (GS) course.The course is delivered with significant student interaction with technology. At University Park, it is offered in multiple sections (typically 40-60 students per section), in the Fall and Spring semesters. At other Penn State campuses, it would be offered in class sizes typically ranging between 20-50 students.
IST 130: Emerging Technologies in Popular Culture	3 Credits	Introduction to academic requirements, career planning & information literacy for students majoring in College of IST.  
IST 140: Introduction to Application Development	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 Seminar in IST (1)
IST 140H: Introduction to Application Development	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 introduces the student to the academic requirements, career planning and information literacy for the School of Information Sciences and Technology degree programs. Seminar in Information Sciences and Technology is required of all Information Sciences and Technology Associate degree candidates. Upon completion of the course, the student will have an understanding of the programs and requirements of the School of Information Sciences and Technology and the University, and the career options for which they prepare students. The student will also develop and exercise habits and techniques for continuing self-assessment of learning styles, personality traits, vocational interests, and career plans. The student will learn how to maintain involvement in professional conversations and networks, including local, state, national, international organizations, listservs, etc. Students will have a basic knowledge of professional news literature, and the ability to identify and use reference tools and databases, which provide access to professional knowledge and literature. Finally, the student will have a basic understanding of government plans, policies and actions regarding the information professions including: regulatory agencies of the executive branch, legislative activities, and judicial decisions at local state and national levels. Students will be graded on course attendance, participation, examinations and brief exercises.
IST 170N: What is Information?	3 Credits	Introduction to academic requirements, career planning, and information literacy for students majoring in the College of Information Sciences and Technology.  
IST 197: Special Topics	3 Credits	 Seminar in IST (1) 
IST 199: Foreign Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 introduces the student to the academic requirements, career planning and information literacy for the School of Information Sciences and Technology degree programs. Seminar in Information Sciences and Technology is required of all Information Sciences and Technology Associate degree candidates.Upon completion of the course, the student will have an understanding of the programs and requirements of the School of Information Sciences and Technology and the University, and the career options for which they prepare students. The student will also develop and exercise habits and techniques for continuing self-assessment of learning styles, personality traits, vocational interests, and career plans. The student will learn how to maintain involvement in professional conversations and networks, including local, state, national, international organizations, listservs, etc. Students will have a basic knowledge of professional news literature, and the ability to identify and use reference tools and databases, which provide access to professional knowledge and literature. Finally, the student will have a basic understanding of government plans, policies and actions regarding the information professions including: regulatory agencies of the executive branch, legislative activities, and judicial decisions at local state and national levels. Students will be graded on course attendance, participation, examinations and brief exercises.Since this is a core requirement, all IST students will be enrolling; it should be offered at least once per year. As enrollment growth warrants, it may require more frequent offering.
IST 210: Organization of Data	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	A survey course that explores emerging technologies used to produce and consume popular cultural artifacts.  
IST 220: Networking and Telecommunications	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 Emerging Technologies in Popular Culture (3) (GA)Popular culture refers to people's capacity to classify, codify, and communicate their experiences symbolically. Popular culture is shaped by the development of new technologies of text, sound and image recording and dissemination. While mass media companies have traditionally served as the primary means by which popular culture is diffused throughout society, emerging technologies enable people to produce and consume their own cultural artifacts as well as redefine mass produced cultural artifacts. As people become more adept in their use of emerging technologies, mass media industries such as film, news, radio and television respond by introducing Internet-based services that deliver both newly designed and repackaged traditional content to consumers. We use four approaches to analyze the intricate relationships between people and industry, emerging technologies and popular culture:1. Production Analysis: Who owns the media? Who creates new media? What technologies are being used to produce new media? how does new media challenge the historical dominance of mass media?2. Textual Analysis: how do specific works of popular culture gain their meaning?3. Audience Analysis: How do different audiences make sense of the same cultural and technological artifacts?4. Historical Analysis: how do current popular culture perspectives on emerging technologies differ from those of the past? What accounts for these changing perspectives? Through individual and team-based learning activities, students will analyze and interact with cultural artifacts across popular culture genres. The course content and the assignments are directed at helping students to both create and critique cultural artifacts in ways that demonstrate their understanding of, engagement with, and reflections upon the relationships among people and industry, emerging technology, popular culture. Assessment is based on students' ability to clearly and convincingly articulate their analysis through classroom discussions, individual activities, and team-based projects. Students will gain hands-on experience with social media such as wikis, virtual worlds, and podcasts. Students will also design and produce short films that demonstrate their ability to integrate and synthesize central themes from the course. Grading will be based on individual and team components. This is an introductory course in IST, and meets the requirements for a General Education course in Arts (GA). This course is delivered with significant student and instructor interaction with computers and digital media.
IST 222H: Community Informatics	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	A first course in concepts and skills for application development. Math 22 is recommended as preparation for 
IST 225: PC Hardware Basics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	. This is a first course in application development. Applications are computer programs developed to support human activity in enterprise and other social contexts. Examples of applications might include programs to help run a business, manage personal information, or provide entertainment. The emphasis of this course is on learning to translate practical problems through domain analysis into software applications usable in a human or organizational context. It will focus on the knowledge needed to create applications that use high level programming languages, combining original code with existing code libraries and application programming interfaces (APIs). Students in this course will learn application development concepts including problem solving using computer programming; how to recognize the need for different types of data and how to use data of different types to represent an application's information; application testing and debugging; basic computer organization; and the basics of operating systems. This is a hands-on, practical course designed for students without prior computer programming experience who will use computer languages and tools to develop applications in their later courses and future careers.
IST 226: Networking Essentials	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	A first course in concepts and skills for application development.  
IST 227: Network Administration	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 Introduction to Application Development (3) This is a first course in application development. Applications are computer programs developed to support human activity in enterprise and other social contexts. Examples of applications might include programs to help run a business, manage personal information, or provide entertainment. The emphasis of this course is on learning to translate practical problems through domain analysis into software applications usable in a human or organizational context. It will focus on the knowledge needed to create applications that use high level programming languages, combining original code with existing code libraries and application programming interfaces (APIs). Students in this course will learn application development concepts including problem solving using computer programming; how to recognize the need for different types of data and how to use data of different types to represent an application&rsquo;s information; application testing and debugging; basic computer organization; and the basics of operating systems. This is a hands-on, practical course designed for students without prior computer programming experience who will use computer languages and tools to develop applications in their later courses and future careers.
IST 228: Advanced Network Administration	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	What is Information?" considers the material and social nature of information in historical and contemporary contexts. How has information been managed and valued? How have information infrastructures served as sites of social and political connection or antagonism? How have ideas about information changed over time and how have they remained the same? The course integrates perspectives from the social sciences and the humanities, and prepares students to think about (and act in) a world in which information (and its linked concepts, like data) play an increasingly important social and political role. The course addresses the history of information as both a concept and as a matter of social practice, and then focuses on three major topics: how information is presented, how information is organized, and how information is put to social and political use. Moving from the earliest periods of human history and their "information ages" (including the birth of writing and the dawn of printing and mass literacy), the course leads students into our contemporary "information society," and the ways in which both the use and manipulation of information shape our lives.
IST 230: Language, Logic, and Discrete Mathematics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
IST 234N: Digital Cultures	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
IST 235: Gender and the Global Information Technology Sector	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Introduction to concept of databases including the storage, manipulation, evaluation, and display of data and related issues. 
IST 237: Digital Entrepreneurship	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 is recommended as preparation for 
IST 240: Introduction to Computer Languages	3 Credits	. 
IST 240H: Introduction to Computer Languages	3 Credits	 Organization of Data (3) As the database management software becomes one of the critical components in modern IT applications and systems, a solid understanding of the fundamental knowledge on the design and management of "data" is required for virtually any IT professionals. In a business setting, such IT professionals should be able to talk to the clients to derive right requirements for database applications, ask the right questions about the nature of their entities and in-between relationships in their business scenarios, analyze and develop an effective and robust design to address business constraints, and react to the existing database designs as new needs arise. Modern IT professionals should be able to guide a company in the best use of the diverse database-related technologies and applications toward the "Big Data" era. As such, 
IST 242: Intermediate & Object-Oriented Application Development	1 Credits	 aims to prepare students for obtaining fundamental understanding on the database concepts and practical skills to analyze and implement a well-defined database design. In particular, 
IST 250: Introduction to Web Design and Development	1 Credits	 provides an introduction to physical database design, data modeling, relational model, logical database design, SQL query language, and instructors' choices on database applications and advanced concepts. Students will learn to use a real-world commercial or open-source database management system, too. Upon taking 
IST 256: Programming for the Web	1 Credits	, students should be able to understand the implications and future directions of databases and database technologies.
IST 260W: Introduction to Systems Analysis and Design	1 Credits	Introduction to digital network topologies; transmission media, signal modulation, digital packet switching and routing, systems integration, communications management, and security. 
IST 261: Application Development Design Studio I	3 Credits	 is recommended as preparation for 
IST 261H: Application Development Design Studio I	3 Credits	. The course includes an introduction to: telecommunications history; telecommunications transmission media (conducted and radiated); transmission characteristics (including an introduction to coding and modulation techniques); error characteristics, detection, and correctional; local and wide area networking applications, hardware, and software; the OSI models; industry standards; topologies; protocols; internetworking devices; communications management; security and recovery; information system applications; and the selection of telecommunications and networking systems. Special attention will be paid to evolving Internet Protocol (IP) technologies, e.g., Internet2. 
IST 294: Research Project	3 Credits	 is an introduction to digital networking and telecommunications and their applications in information systems. It is a required core course for both the two-year and four-year Information Sciences and Technology degrees, and is a critical part of the curriculum. Its objective is to provide the students with a basic understanding of the working of digital networks and the ability to apply this knowledge to specific applications and situations. Evaluation of knowledge objectives will be by examination; and of application (i.e., selection and management) objectives by grading of group and individual projects and case studies. As a "core course", 
IST 295A: Distributed Team Project	3 Credits	 will be offered every semester at University Park, in as many sections as necessary to meet current demand. At other locations where the Associate and Baccalaureate degrees are offered, it will be offered 1-2 times annually depending on demand. Ideally, section size should not exceed 45 students per class. While the course is about digital technology and how it works, it is not a "hands on" course, or a training course in particular equipment and/or applications. While there will be demonstrations of relevant technologies, the course is not equipment-intensive and will not involve special technology needs beyond the normal access to computing and the Internet. The course is not duplicative of any other course currently offered. Although there is some overlap with 
IST 295B: IST Internship	3 Credits	-402, CSE 458, and COMP 421, none of these courses cover exactly the same material, and they operate at a different level of depth and detail. M I S 180 also overlaps somewhat, but it appears that no current course provides the same 200-level mixture of local and wide-area networking and business communications topics.
IST 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	This course combines theory and practice to help students develop a contextualized understanding of community as a conceptual lens for understanding human history and human experience. This course examines the history of community, and of interactions between community and information technology, emphasizing how possibilities and practices of community have been transformed by information technology through the last half century, and currently. The course includes opportunities for students to engage with, and thereby come to understand and appreciate local community institutions off campus. Thus, in the tradition of the Chicago School of Sociology, the course directly utilizes the local community itself as a living laboratory for the study of community informatics. The objective of the course is to help students think critically about community and technology in society, and more specifically, about the how information technology can be used to shape human participation in and experience of community. The course is an honors course. It is run as a small class. It is taught by a research leader in the field of community informatics. The class environment is dominated by debate and discussion. And the course has challenging assignments, involving direct interaction with local community groups.
IST 297: Special Topics	3 Credits	Preparation for PC hardware support: Students learn data recovery and how to build, configure, upgrade, troubleshoot, diagnose, and repair PC's.  
IST 298: Special Topics	3 Credits	 PC Hardware Basics (3) 
IST 299: Foreign Studies	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 covers materials needed to prepare students to function as PC support technicians in business and industry. In a hands-on laboratory environment, students learn to build, configure, upgrade, troubleshoot, diagnose, and repair PC hardware. Course modules cover all the basic hardware components of the PC - their functions, interactions, installation, configuration, upgrading, repair, and replacement. Detailed coverage of system BIOS, CMOS setup, and the boot process is also included. Preventive maintenance and data recovery procedures are also studied. 
IST 301: Information and Organizations	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 is one of four courses required for the Networking Option in the Associate degree in Information Sciences and Technology (IST).The 
IST 302: IT Project Management	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 is designed to help the student to thoroughly understand all the basic hardware and firmware PC components, from PC resources, their function (BIOS and CMOS setup) and interaction, to diagnosing and resolving resource conflicts. The IST student should be able to install, configure, troubleshoot, repair, recover data, correct errors or replace all basic hardware components. The student should also be able to make appropriate hardware recommendations, purchases and upgrade decisions, as well as, determine appropriate preventive maintenance procedures. Finally, the Information Sciences and Technology major will learn how to foster communications, interpersonal, and group interaction skills through appropriate collaborative and active learning projects, laboratory exercises, and related experiences.Achievement of knowledge objectives will be evaluated by examinations. Ability to perform hands-on support activities will be evaluated by grading appropriate group and individual hands-on laboratory projects, scenarios, and case studies.The majority of campuses offering the Associate degree in Information Sciences and Technology will have 20-30 students enrolled in the course. The course will be offered one semester each academic year.
IST 310: Digital Media Metrics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Concepts for peer-to-peer and server-based network:International Organization for Standardization-Open Systems Interconnection (ISO-OSI) reference model, industry standards, troubleshooting, performance monitoring, and optimization.  
IST 311: Object-Oriented Design and Software Applications	3 Credits	 Networking Essentials (3) 
IST 331: Foundations of Human-Centered Design	3 Credits	 covers basic networking concepts such as network types, cable types, wireless technologies, and network adapters. It discusses network models, including the ISO-OSI reference model and all industry standard network architectures. Both peer-to-peer and server-based commercial network operating systems are introduced with hands-on laboratory experience provided. Basic network administration issues are introduced. Internetworking/enterprise networking devices and architectures are also covered, as are network troubleshooting, performance monitoring, and optimization. 
IST 331H: Organization and Design of Information Systems:  User and System Principles	3 Credits	 is one of four courses required for the Networking Option in the Associate degree of Information Sciences and Technology (IST).Achievement of knowledge objectives will be evaluated by examinations. Ability to perform hands-on network administration and support activities will be evaluated by grading appropriate group and individual hands-on laboratory projects, scenarios, and case studies.Upon completion of this course, the students will be able to understand both cabled and wireless media types and be able to select appropriate media. The student will also understand the ISO-OSI and IEEE models and other industry standards, the roles of drivers and protocols and network architectures. The student will have experience with the installation, configuration and administration of basic server-based networking, as well as, an understanding of wide area/enterprise networking, performance monitoring and network troubleshooting. Most important, the student will learn how to foster communications, interpersonal, and group interaction skills through appropriate collaborative and active learning projects, laboratory exercises, and related experiences.The majoriety of campuses offering the Associate degree in Information Sciences and Technology will have 20-30 students enrolled in the course. The course will be offered one semester each academic year.
IST 337: Technologies for Digital Entrepreneurs	3 Credits	Administering peer-to-peer and client/server networks: Planning, installation, server configuration, resource management, remote access, performance monitoring, and optimization.  
IST 361: Application Development Design Studio II	3 Credits	 Network Administration (3) 
IST 389: Leadership and Technology for Instruction	3 Credits	 covers the essential knowledge and skills required to successfully administer peer-to-peer and client/server networks. Hands-on experience with commercial networking software such as Windows 9x, NetWare, Windowns NT Workstation, and Windows NT Server is an important course component. Topics covered include pre-installation planning, network installation, network software architecture, server configuration, profiles and logon scripts, user account management, policies, resource sharing and security, disk management, remote access, backup and recovery, performance monitoring, and network optimization. 
IST 390: Introduction to Professional Development	3 Credits	 is one of four courses required for the Networking Option in the Associate degree in Information Sciences and Technology (IST).Upon completion of this course, the students will be able to understand network software architecture, plan and install peer-to-peer and server-based networks. The IST student will also be able to manage user accounts, profiles, logon scripts, and system policies. The student will have practical experience with disk storage, resources, security, backup and recovery procedures. Finally, the student will be able to manage remote access features, monitor and optimize network performance, and foster communications, interpersonal, and group interaction skills through appropriate collaborative and active learning projects, laboratory exercises, and related experiences.Achievement of knowledge objectives will be evaluated by exam. Ability to perform hands-on network administration and support activities will be evaluated by grading appropriate group and individual hands-on laboratory projects, scenarios, and case studies.The majority of campuses offering the Associate degree in Information Sciences and Technology will have 20-30 students enrolled in the course. The course will be offered one semester each academic year.
IST 397: Special Topics	3 Credits	TCP/IP planning, installation, configuration: IP addressing, subnetting, routing, Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), Windows Internet Naming Service (WINS), address/name resolution, Domain Name System (DNS); database, web, mail server management.  
IST 398: Special Topics	3 Credits	 Advanced Network Administration (3) 
IST 399: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	 covers the essential knowledge and skills required to successfully administer TCP/IP networks and applications servers such as database servers, web servers, and mail servers. Hands-on experience with commerical software such as SQL Server, Exchange Sever, and Internet Information Server is an important course component. Topics covered include TCP/IP planning, installation, and configuration, IP addressing, subnetting, IP routing, DHCP, WINS, address and name resolution protocols, DNS, and management of database, web, and mail servers. 
IST 402: Emerging Issues and Technologies	3 Credits	 is one of four courses required for the Networking Option in the Associate degree of Information Science and Technology (IST).Upon completion of this course, the IST students will be able to plan, install, configure and troubleshoot TCP/IP. The student will also understand IP addressing, subnetting, supernetting, routing and configuration. The student will have practical experience installing and configuring DHCP, WINS, and various protocols. Finally, the IST student will have administrative skills with database, server and web software, as well as, the ability to foster communications, interpersonal, and group interaction skills; through appropriate collaborative and active learning projects, laboratory, exercises, and related experiences.Achievement of knowledge objectives will be evaluated by exam. Ability to perform hands-on network administration and support activites will be evaluated by grading appropriate group and individual hands-on laboratory projects, scenarios, and case studies.The majority of campuses offering the Associate degree in Information Sciences and Technology will have 20-30 students enrolled in the course. The course will be offered one semester each academic year.
IST 402H: Emerging Issues and Technologies	3 Credits	Introduction to formal languages, mathematical logic, and discrete mathematics, with applications to information sciences and technology.  
IST 411: Distributed-Object Computing	3 Credits	 Language, Logic, and Discrete Mathematics (3) 
IST 412: The Engineering of Complex Software Systems	3 Credits	 is one of the five introductory core courses for the baccalaureate degree program in Information Sciences and Technology. The purpose of 
IST 413: Usability Engineering	3 Credits	 is to provide students with an understanding of an array of mathematical concepts and methods which form the foundation of modern information science, in a form that will be relevant and useful for IST students. Exams and assignments will be used to assess that understanding. 
IST 420: Fundamentals of Systems and Enterprise Integration	3 Credits	 will draw some of its material from several mathematical disciplines: formal language theory, mathematical logic, discrete mathematics. In-depth treatments of each of these subjects are offered elsewhere in the University as advanced mathematics and computer science courses. The difference is that 
IST 421: Advanced Enterprise Integration: Technologies and Applications	3 Credits	 will present these concepts in a more elementary way, with much more emphasis on IST applications, and in a more eclectic, web-based format. 
IST 422: Enterprise Architecture Foundations	3 Credits	 will be structured as a small number of modules. Each module will introduce a group of mathematical concepts and present applications of those concepts to problems of information storage, information retrieval, information management, etc. These include: MODULE 1: SET, RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS, NUMBERS set operations, applications of relations, equivalence relations, function composition, inverse functions, logarithms, exponential function, number systems, applications of number theory. APPLICATIONS: mathematical data types (integers, fractions, real numbers, tuples, function spaces); exponential growth; non-feasible algorithms; public key encryption. MODULE 2: LOGIC AND BOOLEAN ALGEBRA predicates, quantifiers, formulas, interpretations, syllogisms, logical consequence, tableau method, boolean connectives, boolean functions, valuations, truth tables, logic gates. APPLICATIONS: database query languages; specification languages; switching circuits; boolean search expressions. MODULE 3: COMBINATORICS AND PROBABILITY combination, permutation, discrete probability APPLICATIONS: lexicographic ordering; combinatorial explosions; lower bouncs of algorithms; reliability of computer systems MODULE 4: GRAPHS AND TREES directed and undirected graphs, weighted graphs, walks, paths, matrix representations, graph algorithms, spanning trees, rooted and structured trees, combining trees to form new trees, inserting nodes in trees, sorting, searching. APPLICATIONS: flow diagrams; task scheduling; critical paths; network connectivity; finite state machines; parsing; derivation; trees as data structures for storing information. MODULE 5: INDUCTION AND RECURSION induction and recursion on the natural numbers and other structures such as trees. APPLICATIONS: recursive evaluation of mathematical and Boolean expressions; recursive searching and sorting algorithms; asymptotic analysis of algorithms. MODULE 6: GRAMMARS, LANGUAGES AND FINITE STATE MACHINES alphabets, strings, grammars, languages, regular languages, regular expressions, finite state machines, language recognizers. APPLICATIONS: regular expression search; efficient pattern matching using finite-state machines.
IST 423: Enterprise Information Management and Storage Architecture	3 Credits	This introductory course will combine theory and practice to help students develop a rich understanding of the constantly evolving US digital culture. We will survey a variety of information and communication technologies (ICTs), and their modes of production, distribution, and consumption by individuals and institutions including traditional media, business, and government. Specifically, we will examine the impact of social and mobile technologies on how we consume, share, resist, and participate in digital culture. Students will also develop basic technical and media creation skills. The general theme of the course is analyzing contemporary cases to understand the significance of new ICTs in shaping our identities, behaviors, language, imaginations, and society. Students will read texts authored by some of the most formative thinkers examining the impact ICTs on society, and apply these core concepts in our analysis of digital cultures. Students will actively use microblogging, RSS feeds, social networking and other Web 2.0 tools to produce and consume content, interact with peers, and reflect critically on this experience. This course will emphasize awareness of current events and technology trends, as well as critical thinking skills and the ability to frame and explore issues through written, visual and verbal communication. This is an introductory course in IST and COMM, and meets the requirements for a Social and Behavioral Sciences (GS) and Humanities (GH) Course. This course is delivered with significant student and instructor interaction with computers and digital media.
IST 424: Architectural Modeling of Organizations	3 Credits	Integrates information technology and gender studies. Overview issues and socio-cultural shaping of gender in the IT field.
IST 425: New Venture Creation	3 Credits	Introduction to foundational concepts for starting and operating digital business, including business models, funding, strategic, operational, structural, and cultural components.  
IST 426: Invention Commercialization	3 Credits	 Digital Entrepreneurship (3) The proliferation of new IT combined with the reach of the Web, Internet, and mobile devices is opening up new possibilities for individuals and companies to leverage IT to create new digital businesses. This course provides a broad overview of the role of entrepreneurial thinking and innovation in advancing IT-focused businesses. Students will examine how these skills can be leveraged to create new IT-driven businesses as well as to create competitive advantage for existing businesses via new IT products and services (i.e., intrapreneurship). This course provides a broad overview of the role of entrepreneurial thinking and innovation in advancing IT-focused businesses and familiarizes students with the processes and tools used to conceptualize and plan new innovative products and/or services that leverage ITas a core component of their business model. Students will be introduced to concepts, tools, and principles of business management including business strategy, finance, marketing, human resources, and leadership within the context of IT business models. This will be a very hands-on active class. Using problem-based learning (PBL) and a &ldquo;flipped&rdquo; classroom, students will spend time outside class learning key concepts and time inside class applying them. Students will have the opportunity to work in teams to practice skills related to identifying novel ideas, assessing market opportunities, defining customer segments, identifying key partners, and building IT-based business models. In addition to regular in-class hands-on activities, each student will be expected to contribute to a class blog.
IST 431: The Information Environment	3 Credits	Introduction to the specification and application of languages and language paradigms that interact with computers.  
IST 432: Legal and Regulatory Environment of Information Science and Technology	3 Credits	 is recommended to be taken before or at the same time as 
IST 437: Digital Design & Innovation	3 Credits	. 
IST 440W: Information Sciences and Technology Integration and Problem Solving	3 Credits	 is one of two courses added to the three core courses for the associate degree program to form the core courses for the baccalaureate degree program in Information Sciences and Technology. The primary goal of this course is to study the foundations underlying the design, specification and use of a wide variety of language paradigms used to interact with computers. The following details the content of the course: (1) nature of languages; (2) elements of languages; (3) classification of languages; (4) formal descriptions of languages; (5) data and types; (6) names and bindings; (7) control structures; (8) language processors; and (9) study experiences. Student evaluation may be accomplished by means of assignments, examinations, and possibly a project. This course will most likely involve Web-based course material and will therefore require student access to computers and the Web. Although other existing courses are similar to 
IST 441: Information Retrieval and Organization	3 Credits	 in content, none of those courses fit the objective of this course and of this program.
IST 442: Information Technology in an International Context	3 Credits	Introduction to the specification and application of languages and language paradigms that interact with computers.
IST 445: Globalization Trends and World Issues	3 Credits	Intermediate application development including algorithms, data structures, and object-oriented concepts.  
IST 446: An Introduction to Building Computer/Video Games	3 Credits	 Intermediate & Object-Oriented Application Development (3) This is a second course in application development. It will focus on the intermediate knowledge needed to create applications that use high level programming languages, combining original code with existing code libraries and application programming interfaces (APIs). The perspective will be of application development that takes place within a human and organizational context; in this sense data structures will be construed as representations of organizational entities and information, and algorithms as a reflection of human and organizational processes and activity. Students will also learn about common application architectures and design patterns. This is a hands-on, practical course designed for IST design and development option undergraduate students and others as an elective.
IST 450A: Search Engine Marketing	3 Credits	Introduction to how the World Wide Web utilizes emerging technologies. Students acquire conceptual and practical understanding of constructing Web sites. 
IST 450B: Digital Advertising	3 Credits	 is recommended to be taken before or at the same time as 
IST 451: Network Security	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	.   This course provides an introduction to the visual/information design of Web sites and the technologies of the World Wide Web. Students will acquire a sound conceptual understanding of how to design and construct simple to complex web sites, and how this knowledge can be applied in practical ways across all disciplines. Knowledge gained in this course will support the Information Sciences and Technology (IST) Associate degree, as well as other degree options within IST and across the university. Knowledge gained in this course will also support other disciplines within the University, as the Web becomes the predominant publication medium of the 21st Century.   There are two major course objectives: (1) students will be able to perform a written critical evaluation of any web site, using the criteria listed below for evaluation; (2) students will be able to develop a written and/or electronic comprehensive proposal for the design or redesign of a web site, based on their understanding of visual and information design.
IST 452: Legal and Regulatory Environment of Privacy and Security	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	
IST 453: Legal, Regulatory, Policy Environment of Cyber Forensics	3 Credits	 will provide students with the knowledge and skills to create both basic and more dynamic web-based content pages and applications. The course will first focus on acquiring competencies in core web development languages including HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, then move on to more advanced topics such as information architecture, incorporation of multimedia, and the use of application programming interfaces (APIs) and application development frameworks for the web. The course will follow an active learning pedagogy and incorporate a substantial project component. The first part of the course consists of introduction of web programming concepts, techniques, and tools. Students will demonstrate understanding of the course content by building web pages via individual and group activities. The latter half of the course will involve more in-depth project work both as individuals and in groups.
IST 454: Computer and Cyber Forensics	3 Credits	Introduction to systems analysis and design, stressing the process of requirements acquisition, specification, design, and implementation.  
IST 456: Information Security Management	3 Credits	 Introduction to Systems Analysis and Design (3)
IST 461: Database Management and Administration	3 Credits	 is an introductory course to system analysis and design. It covers the process and is intended to be independent of the specific system, whether it be a hardware, software, telecommunication, logistics, or information system. This course can be used as a prerequisite to specific Associate degree system design courses. It can also be used for breadth for those IST students who do not pursue technical emphases. It serves as a writing across the curriculum course for the Information Sciences and Technology Associate degree. The course looks at two design paradigms. A small design project is included in the course. The objectives of the course include: (1) teaching students the importance of teamwork, project management, and oral and written communication skills; (2) teaching students a systems design strategy that emphasizes customer requirements at all stages of the process; (3) introducing students to the object oriented design process; (4) giving students a full design experience on a small project such as designing an e-Commerce system; and (5) showing students examples of the writing required for systems design and requiring them to write individual and team reports as well as give oral presentations on their designs. Students will be evaluated by examinations and by grading of their written reports and oral presentations. System design courses are taught at the upper-division level in Engineering and Business departments. This is a lower-division course that serves as an introduction for Associate degree students to give them a background for project-level courses in their fourth semester. It will serve as a core requirement in the Associate degree program and act as a prerequisite for the design courses that are capstone courses in many of the Associate degree options. The course will be offered one semester each academic year.
IST 462: Database Modeling and Applications	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Introductory design and development studio course for IST and SRA students.  
IST 489: Research Methods for the Information Sciences and Technology	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 Application Development Design Studio I (3) This studio course will provide opportunities for students to practice the technical skills acquired in their foundation application design and development courses, specifically, in 
IST 494: Research Project	1-3 Credits/Maximum of 3	 and 
IST 494H: Honors Thesis Research	1-3 Credits/Maximum of 3	. The course will follow the general format of experiential studios in the arts and architecture. It will be primarily problem-based and project oriented. Peer and instructor design critiques will be the major feedback and assessment mechanisms. Students in the IST Software Design Studios will be expected to complete deliverables in each phase of the systems development lifecycle (i.e. problem definition, requirements analysis, design, development, test) regardless of the development paradigm employed (plan-based, agile, etc). A key objective of this design studio will be to introduce students to the challenges faced in different application design and development activities before exposing them to specific techniques to manage these challenges in upper-division courses. Projects may be undertaken by individuals, pairs, or larger groups but each studio participant will be responsible for producing significant individual project deliverables. Project ideas may come from the student or from the instructor; however, projects related to students&rsquo; other course deliverables will require the agreement of both instructors. Students will be required to maintain a design and development journal. This journal will be the analog of an engineering notebook or artist&rsquo;s sketchbook and should contain a running account of the students design and development ideas, explorations, rationale, and other notes. The IST design and development studios are a forum for serious students to engage with the concepts, process, tools, and materials used to envision and build software applications. Both collaboration and individual performance will be emphasized, as will experimentation, risk-taking, and enthusiasm for the process of designing and building working software applications. Students will be expected to improvise and then respond constructively to feedback from instructors and peers.
IST 495: Internship	1-3 Credits/Maximum of 3	Introductory design and development studio course for IST and SRA students.
IST 496: Independent Studies	1-3 Credits/Maximum of 3	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
IST 497: Special Topics	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	
IST 498: Special Topics	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 Distributed Team Project (3) This course offers a web-based distributed project that simulates an internship of a student in a company. Faculty gather information system design projects from industry or units within the university. These projects are announced on the web and students bid to join groups to work on the projects. Each project has a faculty mentor with an additional industrial mentor where appropriate. Student groups are formed by the mentors based on the resumes and skill sets of the students. Students bid on one project at a time until they have been selected to be a member of a project team. Membership in a group may include students from different campuses throughout the Penn State System. The majority of communication within the groups and with the mentors is to be via the internet. This course gives a true experience in information project development. Students will be graded as a team by the faculty mentor on the quality of the project. An individual written report detailing the work accomplished during the course is required from all team members. The grade of the individual report and the team project grade form a basis for student evaluation.The objectives of the course include: (1) teaching students the importance of teamwork, project management, and oral and written communication skills: and (2) exposing students to the virtual workplace and providing them with meaningful information and technology related tasks.
SRA 1: First-Year Seminar in Security and Risk Analysis	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	
SRA 99: Foreign Studies	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 IST Internship (1-3) This course is offered as an internship for a student within a company. Faculty and industry collaborate to specify the duties of the intern. The faculty member responsible for the course then approves the internship. The internship must consist of a minimum of 150 hours of meaningful information and technology related tasks. A written report by the student, detailing the work accomplished during the internship, is required. This report and a report from the intern supervisor form the basis for the grade.The objectives of the course include: (1) teaching students the importance of teamwork, project management, and oral and written communication skills; and (2) exposing students to the workplace and providing them with meaningful information and technology related tasks.
SRA 111: Introduction to Security and Risk Analysis	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Creative projects, including research and design, that are supervised on an individual basis and that fall outside the scope of formal courses.
SRA 197: Special Topics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
SRA 199: Foreign Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
SRA 211: Threat of Terrorism and Crime	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
SRA 221: Overview of Information Security	3 Credits	Overview of organizational structures and functions. Includes information processing and analytic perspectives of organizations.  
SRA 231: Decision Theory and Analysis	3 Credits	 Information and Organizations (3) This course provides students the opportunity to learn and experience: 1. Applicable organization and the ways in which IT can alter and enable these activities. 2. A series of analytic techniques that students can use to investigate the effects of new IT on work and organization. 3. Examples and problems set in and drawn from a range of domains including military, medical, high technology, business and government.This course is designed around a series of ill-structured, contemporary problems that require students to develop responses by applying analytic techniques and theories of work and organization. At the end of the course, students will be able to: 1. Apply theories of work and organization as analytic techniques. 2. Conduct organizational and inter-organizational process analyses. 3. Map information flows among organizational units and actors.
SRA 268: Visual Analytics	3 Credits	Exploration and application of the basic concepts, methodologies, and tools of project management in the field of information sciences and technology.  
SRA 294: Research Project	3 Credits	 IT Project Management (3) This course is designed to introduce and explore the basic concepts and practices of project management and help students understand how to plan and manage IT projects successfully. Throughout the course, students will be asked to utilize course concepts, methodologies, and tools while utilizing technology applications and addressing real-world problems. Students will learn the skills necessary to define project scope, create workable project plans, and manage projects with quality, budget, and schedule in mind. The course is structured around the key phases of project lifecycle, including initiating a project, developing project plans, executing and managing a project, and closing out a project. In addition, students will be taught how to identify and address the change management and political issues associated with project management.
SRA 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	Analysis of audience data for traditional and new media to create metrics for advertising, content marketing and audience analysis.  COMM (IST) 310 Digital Media Metrics (3) The emergence of a converged marketplace where all media are now digital, including broadcasting, websites and social media, has created enormous new opportunities for advertising, promotions and content distribution. The proliferation of media has made the marketplace much more competitive, but simultaneously the availability of data too has increased significantly making possible the much more precise and segmented distribution of messages and content. For media practitioners in this new environment, a familiarity with audience data, metrics and dimensions is essential.  This course is an introduction to the methods for collecting, analyzing and utilizing audience data for traditional and new media. The class will cover the fundamentals of traditional media audience analysis, web metrics, and social media metrics, specifically as they relate to audience measurement, advertising campaign evaluation and content distribution. Students will learn the methods of data collection, analysis and use for traditional broadcast media, and the transformation of these practices in the newly digitized and converged multiplatform, multiscreen environment. The course will also cover the basics of data capture for new media (at an appropriate technical level), and the use of this data for the design of metrics appropriate for various purposes such as monitoring traffic, conversions and revenue generation. The use of metrics in pricing models for advertising, sales generation and content distribution will also be covered. Students will be introduced to data sources for digital media audience analysis, with a special focus on Google Analytics. Students passing this class would be able to pass the Google Analytics Individual Qualification test.
SRA 297: Special Topics	3 Credits	Introduction to object-oriented applications including applications in an Object Oriented Design (OOD) language or OOD languages.  
SRA 299: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	 Object-Oriented Design and Software Applications (3) 
SRA 311: Risk Analysis in a Security Context	3 Credits	 is among the courses making up the Application Design & Development option in the Baccalaureate degree in Information Sciences and Technology. This course is normally taken in the 5th or 6th semester. It is the first upper-division course in the option sequence. The course is intended to provide students with a background in object-oriented design and object-oriented application development. Students will learn the fundamentals of object-oriented analysis, design, and modeling. They will apply design concepts and develop the skills necessary to bring an idea through the different phases of the application development lifecycle. The course normally involves students working on teams to design and develop working application prototypes. Upon completion of this course, students will be able to apply object-oriented design principles using object-oriented modeling and programming languages, show how object-oriented principles increase the quality of complex applications, and begin development of the team skills necessary when developing complex systems.
SRA 311W: Risk Analysis in a Security Context	3 Credits	Interdisciplinary survey of topics and methods related to the human-centered design use and usability of information systems.  
SRA 365: Statistics for Security and Risk Analysis	3 Credits	 Foundations of Human-Centered Design: User and System Principles (3) This course provides a focused introduction to one of the most complicated parts of information systems design: users and the contexts in which they live, work, and play. The course provides a balance between theory and practice, which are tightly intertwined in this area. Students will learn how to use social science theories about human capabilities and group behavior to predict whether an information system will be usable and useful, and they will learn about the opportunities and challenges that are associated with a wide range of emerging technologies. Students will also gain skills in designing and evaluating information systems that meet the needs of a target audience. Because the information technology design space evolves rapidly, much of the technology-related content covered in this course will evolve from year to year; however the focus throughout will be understanding and responding to the needs, capabilities and preferences of the users of interactive information systems. The format of the class may include lectures, readings, in-class or online discussions, projects, or case studies. Assessment of student performance may include short assignments, quizzes, exams, or in-depth projects.
SRA 397: Special Topics	3 Credits	Interdisciplinary survey of topics related to the use and usability of information systems.
SRA 399: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Introduction to the tools available to IT entrepreneurs considering starting-up or looking to develop new applications.  
SRA 421: The Intelligence Environment	3 Credits	 Technologies for Digital Entrepreneurs (3) This course introduces the student to the applications, technologies, and tools for entrepreneurs engaging in or considering engaging in a start-up or running a small-to-medium size business. Although there will be some consideration of product concept development and implementation, much of the course will be devoted to the tools and infrastructure need to support a start-up up a small-to-medium size business. These concepts and skills will also support entrepreneurs looking to develop new applications to open new market opportunities. This will be a very hands-on and active class that relies on approaches such as problem-based learning (PBL), &ldquo;flipped&rdquo; classrooms, and learning by doing. Students will spend time outside class learning key concepts and time inside class applying them. Students will have the opportunity to implement applications of the back-end technologies in support of a start-up or small- or medium-sized enterprises.
SRA 433: Deception and Counterdeception	3 Credits	Second of two design and development studio courses for IST and SRA students.  
SRA 440W: Security and Risk Analysis Capstone Course	3 Credits	 Application Development Design Studio II (3) This studio course will provide opportunities for students to practice technical skills acquired in their previous design and development courses to date, specifically, in 
SRA 450: Cyber-Crime and Cyber-Warfare	3 Credits	, Introduction to Application Development; 
SRA 468: Visual Analytics for Security Intelligence	1-4 Credits	, Intermediate and Object-Oriented Application Development; and 
SRA 471: Informatics, Risk, and the Post-Modern World	1-4 Credits	, Object-Oriented Design and Software Applications. The course will follow the general format of experiential studios in the arts and architecture. It will be primarily largely problem-based and project oriented. Peer and instructor design critiques will be the primary feedback and assessment mechanisms. Students in the IST Software Design Studios will be expected to complete deliverables in each phase of the systems development lifecycle (i.e. problem definition, requirements analysis, design, development, test) regardless of the development paradigm employed (plan-based, agile, etc). A key objective of this design studio will be to provide application development opportunities where students can apply knowledge and practice techniques gained from their foundation and first upper-division courses. Projects may be undertaken by individuals, pairs, or larger groups but each studio participant will be responsible for producing significant individual project deliverables. Project ideas may come from the student or from the instructor; however, projects related to students&rsquo; other course deliverables will require the agreement of both instructors. Students will be required to maintain a design and development journal. This journal will be the analog of an engineering notebook or artist&rsquo;s sketchbook and should contain a running account of the students design and development ideas, explorations, rationale, and other notes. The IST design and development studios are a forum for serious students to engage with the concepts, process, tools, and materials used to envision and build software applications. Both collaboration and individual performance will be emphasized, as will experimentation, risk-taking, and enthusiasm for the process of designing and building working software applications. Students will be expected to improvise and then respond constructively to feedback from instructors and peers.
SRA 472: Integration of Privacy and Security	1 Credits	Leadership in college instructional settings; teaching and learning principles; instructional technologies; and best practices in coaching, team facilitation, learning assessment. This course prepares undergraduate students for their role as Learning Assistants (LA's) in the College of IST. In this course, LA's will prepare to assist in instructional environments that encourage students to participate actively in their learning. LA's will be immersed in activities that introduce them to some of the teaching methods aimed at promoting active learning in College of IST classrooms, while being prepared for leadership responsibilities such as coaching, providing feedback, evaluating, monitoring academic integrity, fostering inclusive learning environments, and supporting teams. Students will also learn about information technologies designed for managing courses and increasing student engagement. Outside of class meetings, students will serve as instructional assistants in an assigned course. They will be mentored, supervised, and evaluated on the job by their assigned faculty member.
SRA 480: Crisis Informatics	1 Credits	Interdisciplinary course to introduce students to the issues, concepts and skills involved in successfully transitioning into professional life.  
SRA 494: Research Project	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 Introduction to Professional Development (1) 
SRA 496: Independent Studies	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 focuses on introducing the students to professionalism and professional development in the field of IT. Emphasis will be placed on the theories and skills required for planning, developing, implementing, and managing professional skills. For example, students will attempt to master relationship skills such as client relationship management and interpersonal communication, business skills such as presentation planning and scheduling; leadership skills such as decision making and goal setting; and career management skills such as networking and interviewing. Additional focus will be placed on the various resources and strategies available for pursuing a successful job search. Students will be given opportunities to practice the concepts, theories, and methodologies learned in class by working in teams on real-world case studies (many derived from corporate partners). Students will be periodically assessed through examinations, case studies, individual and group assignments and projects, and other performance indicators where appropriate.The audience is students who are ready to enter the work force. For those pursuing Baccalaureate Degrees, this would mean a class standing of Junior or Senior. For those pursuing Associate Degrees, this would mean a second year standing.
SRA 497: Special Topics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
CMPSC 100: Computer Fundamentals and Applications	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
CMPSC 101: Introduction to Programming	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
CMPSC 102: Introduction to Visual Programming	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Introduction to emerging issues, technology forecasting and analysis; overview of emerging issues and leading technologies in IST and how they impact information systems, users, the IT labor force and society.  
CMPSC 111: Logic for Computer Science	3 Credits/Maximum of 9	 Emerging Issues and Technologies (3 per semester/maximum of 9) Information Sciences and Technology (IST) is a rapidly changing discipline. New issues, methods, tools, applications and terminology appear on a continual basis. A key skill is the ability to analyze new issues and assess new technologies within the context of the information age. This course prepares students to understand the difference between potential technological failures and success, fads and revolutionary technology. It also helps students to view emerging issues as an opportunity rather than a threat. Intellectual tools are provided to assist in understanding issues, assessing and forecasting technological changes for feasibility and planning in real world situations. The course provides students with: a.) A process framework for analyzing new issues and a theoretical framework to study technological and social impacts of such issues. b.) A process framework for recognizing and understanding new technologies and a theoretical framework to take advantage of such technologies. c.) Exposure to new issues and technologies. d.) Hands-on experience in studying recent technological advances in detail.The course will also provide students with the ability to: a.) Understand the concept of issue analysis and technology forecasting. b.) Recognize the important of new issues and technologies in information sciences. c.) Incorporate these new issues and technologies into an existing information systems framework. d.) Develop and implement new technology solutions, or discuss policies for addressing emerging issues. e.) Predict impacts of issues and technology on information management, users, policies, and the environment.Each time the course is offered; new issues and.or information technology areas will be explored. Examples of issues and technologies addressed include: wireless communications, security and intrusion detection, intelligent agents, web search, languages, intelligent systems, bio-informatics, advanced visualization and human-computer interactions, ubiquitous-pervasive computing, groupware, computer aided cognition, system design by global IT teams, IT outsourcing, and digital divide.
CMPSC 121: Introduction to Programming Techniques	3 Credits/Maximum of 9	Introduction to emerging issues, technology forecasting and analysis; overview of emerging issues and leading technologies in IST and how they impact information systems, users, the IT labor force and society.
CMPSC 122: Intermediate Programming	3 Credits/Maximum of 9	Introduction to distributed-object computing and its use in client/server and real-world computing applications.  This course presents the fundamental concepts of distributed-object computing, including client/server computing which is an important platform for real-world computing systems. The course focuses on design, development, and deployment of distributed systems. Students will also consider issues of managing distributed systems and the relationships between organizational processes and information-system architectures. 
CMPSC 122H: Intermediate Programming	3 Credits/Maximum of 9	 is an elective course for the Baccalaureate degree program in Information Sciences and Technology. Students completing the Systems Development Option may take this course to fulfill option requirements.  Upon completion of this course, students will have a broad understanding of the fundamental concepts of distributed objects and distributed-computing architectures, have the ability to apply these concepts to real-world applications, and be able to design, develop, deploy, and maintain distributed applications.
CMPSC 131: Programming and Computation I: Fundamentals	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	Introduction to the engineering of complex software systems including software system specification, design and implementation, integration and test, and evolution.  
CMPSC 132: Programming and Computation II: Data Structures	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	 The Engineering of Complex Software Systems (3) This course presents the fundamental concepts of the engineering of complex software systems, including iterative and agile development strategies.  The course gives students insight into the full software development cycle, including design, implementation, test and quality assurance, deployment, maintenance, and project estimation and management.  
CMPSC 199: Foreign Studies	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	 is an elective course for the Baccalaureate degree program in Information Sciences and Technology. Students completing the Systems Development Option may take this course to fulfill option requirements. Upon completion of this course, students will have a broad understanding of the fundamental concepts of complex system software engineering and be able to apply these concepts to managing and developing a complex software project over the full software development cycle.
CMPSC 200: Programming for Engineers with MATLAB	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	This course addresses activities in the system development process that ensure usability.  It considers the emerging concept of usability, requirements gathering and analysis, activity design, information design, interaction design, documentation design, user testing and usability evaluation.  
CMPSC 201: Programming for Engineers with C++	3 Credits	 Usability Engineering (3) The modern system development process includes concurrent engineering of usability - features of a system that make it approachable, learnable, as well as easy and satisfying to use. Topics in the course include the emerging concept of usability, requirements gathering and analysis, the use of scenarios and claims to describe and analyze both current human practices and envisioned practices, activity design, information design, interaction design, documentation design, and user testing, including techniques for formative and summative usability evaluation.
CMPSC 203: Introduction to Spreadsheets and Databases	3 Credits	Introductory course on integration of information technology into different venues, including the planning, development, and implementation of the integration.  
CMPSC 208: Technical Game Development	3 Credits	 Fundamentals of Systems and Enterprise Integration (3) 
CMPSC 221: Object Oriented Programming with Web-Based Applications	3 Credits	 focuses on introducing the student to the role of information systems and technologies in achieving a variety of system goals. Emphasis will be placed on the theories and skills required for planning, developing, implementing, and managing the integration of information technology and different systems. 
CMPSC 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	 is required of all Information Sciences and Technology (IST) undergraduates who have chosen the Information Technology Integration Option in their baccalaureate degree. It is the prerequisite for 
CMPSC 297: Special Topics	3 Credits	 which is also required for the Option. Upon completion of the course, the student will be able to recognize information technology integration. They will also understand the &quot;business processes and information value chain&quot; within a system, and be able to foster an understanding of the role of IT in system integration. Students will be periodically assessed through examinations, case studies, individual and group assignments and projects, and other performance indicators where appropriate.
CMPSC 299: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Advanced course on the integration of information technology into systems applications.  
CMPSC 302: Intermediate Visual Programming	3 Credits	 Advanced Enterprise Integration: Technology and Applications (3) 
CMPSC 311: Introduction to Systems Programming	3 Credits	 expands the knowledge gained in 
CMPSC 312: Computer Organization and Architecture	3 Credits	 on the theories and skills required for planning, developing, implementing, and managing information systems. 
CMPSC 313: Assembly Language Programming	3 Credits	 is required of all Information Sciences and Technology (IST) undergraduates who have chosen the Information Technology: Integration and Application Option in their Baccalaureate degree. Upon completion of the course, the student will have expanded knowledge of information technology and systems integration issues across multiple application settings. They will also have a deeper understanding of the specific information technology (both hardware and software) that can serve as the foundation for designing systems within an organization, and have experience that fosters an understanding of the role of IT achieving system performance goals.
CMPSC 335: Fundamentals of Communication Networks	3 Credits	Theoretical foundations and practice of enterprise architecture.  
CMPSC 360: Discrete Mathematics for Computer Science	3 Credits	 Enterprise Architecture Foundations (3) Enterprise Architecture is the overall framework and set of strategic objectives for the usage of technology over time across an organization. Enterprise Architecture can also be described as the top-down, strategy-driven, integrating framework that brings together and manages the business model, applications and technology. Its primary goal is to facilitate improvement and deliver business-aligned information systems. This course presents the key components and processes involved in the effective creation and governance of enterprise architectures. Students will acquire knowledge about the key foundational aspects of enterprise architecture, learn what decisions need to be made and how to make them, and be able to explain and justify their recommendations.
CMPSC 395: Internship	3 Credits	Provide in-depth study of the concepts, issues, and technologies associated with the complex world of enterprise information and storage architecture.  
CMPSC 397: Special Topics	3 Credits	 Enterprise Information Management and Storage Architecture (3) This course is designed to introduce students to enterprise information storage and management concepts, issues, trends, and technologies. As a junior/senior level course, the focus will center on applying design concepts and associated technologies to real-world problems in the area of enterprise information storage and management . Existing partnerships with leading information management firms will be leveraged to provide real-world exposure to the complex enterprise information storage and management issues facing all organizations today. This course also focuses increasingly on the critical areas of information security and the emerging field of information storage virtualization.The course will mix technical details, applied value, and organizational insights of enterprise information storage and management through the use of labs, case studies, real-life problems, and team projects. This is a unique course that has generated great industry interest.
CMPSC 399: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Theoretical foundations and practice of enterprise modeling.  
CMPSC 410: Programming Models for Big Data	3 Credits	 Architectural Modeling of Organizations (3) Enterprise Architecture is the overall framework and set of strategic objectives for the usage of technology over time across an organization. Enterprise Architecture can also be described as the top-down, strategy-driven, integrating framework that brings together and manages the organization model, applications and technology. Its primary goal is to facilitate improvement and deliver organization-aligned information systems. Effective modeling is crucial for successful EA. This course provides an exposure to the foundational concepts and practices of effective enterprise modeling for EA. Students will acquire knowledge about the key foundational knowledge in modeling different layers of the enterprise, learn what decisions need to be made and how to make them, and be able to explain and justify their models and recommendations. This course explores the use and effectiveness of architectural modeling to describe an organization and to integrate and manage IT resources strategically from an enterprise perspective. Hands-on exercises and cases studies are used to illustrate the role and effect of enterprise architecture concepts and methodologies. Emphasis is placed on understanding different architectural approaches, standards, and styles. Students will use enterprise architectural tools to develop descriptive models and understand how to integrate and manage IT within and between organizations. For each general topic area, core readings are used to define standard vocabulary, concepts and relations, methods and criteria for evaluation, and implications for enterprise architecture. Students participate in class discussions as well as complete written assignments that focus on solidifying the understanding of the course content. Students also complete a team modeling project that is motivated by, and whose outcomes are discussed with respect to, one or more theoretical frameworks covered in the course.
CMPSC 412: Data Structures Lab	3 Credits	Via problem-based learning, teams define new business ventures to meet current market needs, develop business plans, and present to investors.  ENGR 425ENGR (MGMT/IST/ENTR) 425 Introduction to Entrepreneurship (3) The goal of ENGR (MGMT/IST/ENTR) 425 is to better prepare undergraduate students to be business leaders in adaptive, globally-minded, technology-savvy companies. The course is structured so students develop skills that are of high value in any workplace: they develop improved leadership skills, higher self-efficacy, creativity and the ability to deal with ambiguity. On course completion, students will have a working knowledge of traditional and non-traditional ways for identifying a new product or business opportunity, quantifying the potential, understanding the key competitive factors, researching the audience and producing a convincing executive summary for internal or external financing and launch. Students who want to augment the skills and knowledge from their major with the ability to refine a new product/service process in an interdisciplinary team will find ENGR (MGMT/IST/ENTR) 425 a valuable course.This is a novel problem-based learning (PBL) course, where the learning is student-centered, with faculty acting primarily in the role of facilitators. Active learning happens in this course because students develop ownership in their new business venture concept and are fully responsible for the genesis of the idea. The course leverages the on-line course management system (ANGEL) to define weekly learning objectives, support electronic delivery of assignments, robust video content with entrepreneurs is provided on CD-ROM or via ANGEL, providing additional insights into entrepreneurship. The technology or business segment focus of the class is easily adapted by using different case studies and course mentors.This will be one of two courses in the new two-course sequence for business students in entrepreneurship. This course will be accepted as a supporting course in the Engineering Entrepreneurship Minor (E-SHIP) and in the Engineering Leadership Development Minor (ELDM). ENGR (MGMT/IST/ENTR) 425 can be used as a technical elective in many of the engineering departments. It will be accepted as a Support of Option course for the Information Sciences and Technology (IST) major.This course will be offered each Fall and Spring semester with two sections each semester. Class enrollment per section will be set at 60 total.
CMPSC 413: Algorithms Lab	3 Credits	Working with Penn State inventions selected by the Intellectual Property Office, student teams define an optimum commercialization path each technology.  ENGR 426ENGR (MGMT/IST/ENTR) 426 Invention Commercialization (3) The goal of ENGR (MGMT/IST/ENTR) 426 is to have students understand why invention commercialization is complicated and difficult by participating in the process. For example, the inventor rarely has insights into the markets for his/her invention, is often not interested in the details of commercialization, and can be secretive. In addition, the business and financial communities often do not take the time, or have the resources, to understand new technologies and perform complex due diligence. Thus lack of due diligence often leads to rejection of innovation because existing companies often discount new technologies from outside the company as NIH - &quot;not invented here&quot;.Effective transfer of new invention or innovation to a commercial product requires at least three different functional communities to interface: technical, legal and business. Each uses a different language, comes from different educational and cultural backgrounds, and may have an inherent distrust of the others. These functional barriers are difficult to overcome.This course teaches how these barriers can be broken down as student teams help bridge the perceived chasm between key players in the invention commercialization process. In these teams, students bring the skills and knowledge from their major to develop an invention commercialization recommendation for the Technology Transfer Office and the inventor. For example, business students focus on finance and market opportunity assessment; engineering and IST students focus on design refinements, prototyping support, and (if appropriate) making technology suggestions to the inventor.Upon completing the course, the students will have a working knowledge of different university and corporate technology or invention commercialization processes, important intellectual property management tools for inventions (patents, license agreements, option agreements) source of funding to move inventions toward product development, and delivering top quality presentations which outline the recommended commercialization path. Students who enjoy open-ended projects which involve the interplay of business and invention of who wants to work on interdisciplinary teams with the newest inventions will find this course a valuable course. NOTE: Because the inventions/products are based on Penn State faculty intellectual property, students must sign the Penn State Special Intellectual Property Agreement For Students - For Use When Assigning Intellectual Property to The Pennsylvania State University. The form can be viewed at http://guru.psu.edu/policies/RAG13.htmlThe course will be offered both Spring and Fall semesters with an enrollment of 40 students.
CMPSC 414: Contest Programming	3 Credits	Survey of social environment of information technology themes: Community, sovereignty, privacy, ethics, economics, and knowledge management.  
CMPSC 421: Net-centric Computing	3 Credits	 The Information Environment (3) The ways that people communicate and utilize information is being changed dramatically by new information technologies. Information and the technologies that are employed by create, organize, transger, and utilize that information in a networked environment, using such global networks as the internet or internal networks such as intranets, have become a key component of the global economy. This global environment can change the way we interact, communicate, and function on the job and in our daily lives. The new technologies also raise new economic, legal, ethical, and social issues that are of grave importance to society. 
CMPSC 426: Object-oriented Design	3 Credits	 examines the overall context of the new information environment and new technical issues relating to knowledge management in the global networked environment. 
CMPSC 430: Database Design	3 Credits	 is a required course in the Information, Society and Public Policy Option.There may be some overlap of material with 
CMPSC 431W: Database Management Systems	3 Credits	, 
CMPSC 436: Communications and Networking	3 Credits	, COMM 485, 
CMPSC 438: Computer Network Architecture and Programming	3 Credits	, PHIL 423, 
CMPSC 440: Data-driven Security Analytics	3 Credits	 and PL SC 460m but none of these courses cover the same material, or approach it in the same manner.Upon completion of this course, the student will gain an appreciation of the differences between &quot;cyberspace&quot; and the &quot;real&quot; world. The student will also understand that the implementation and modern information technologies has significant social and policy implications that demand appropriate policy issues in several different contexts (globa, national, local). The student will also be able to discuss the major themes in information policy studies (e.g., community, privacy, access, economic participation, security) and be able to relate these themes to the applications of particular technologies. They will be able to describe policy frameworks and issues, as well as the ethical and social implications of these choices.Homework assignments; Socratic dialogue; analysis and write-up of case studies; assessment of group research projects and presentations; participation in on-line discussion groups; two mid-term and one final examination (objective and essay). The precise mix of evaluation components will be determined by individual instructors; a typical weighting might be exams (60%), written assignments and papers (20%), and collaborative projects (20%).
CMPSC 441: Artificial Intelligence	3 Credits	 will be offered every semester at University Park. At every other campus location where the Baccalaureate degree program is offered, the course will be offered 1-2 times annually depending on demand. Student enrollment at University Park will begin at approximately 50-75 in the first year and grow to 200 over a 3-4 year time period. At other locations, enrollment should range from 25-50 annually.
CMPSC 442: Artificial Intelligence	3 Credits	Legal environment of information technology, constitutional/political issues, intellectual property, management, e-commerce, privacy, access, computer contracting, cyberspace regulation.  
CMPSC 443: Introduction to Computer and Network Security	3 Credits	 Legal and Regulatory Environment of Information Science and Technology (3) The new information technologies are creating a global economy heavily dependent upon networked information, hardware, software, and electronic commerce, which calls for adaptation of existing legal and business practices. In many cases, the new technologies pose problems that existing laws or legislation are inadequate to cope with; but the complexity of the environment makes new solutions elusive. This course examines the legal, regulatory, and political environment within which intellectual property rights and examination of contracting issues, licensing of information and products, data protection, patents, cyberspace regulation, and implications for personal privacy. It also focuses on where technology is making regulation difficult by challenging previous concepts upon which our legal and regulatory systems depend.
CMPSC 444: Secure Programming	3 Credits	This course introduces students to design thinking, user-driven innovation and user experience, and business model implementation issues for IT-driven innovation.  
CMPSC 445: Applied Machine Learning in Data Science	3 Credits	 Digital Design & Innovation (3) IT-driven innovation requires a deep understanding of the user, the context of the compute environment, and a systems approach to identifying critical system features. In addition, the IT-driven innovation must meet user needs in a commercially feasible manner. Students taking this class will work in teams to create a design concept and refine it through user analysis and prototyping. To get to a commercially feasible concept, students will analyze the competitive landscape and the ecosystem in which their concept will reside. Each team will express their concepts using the Business Model Canvas&ndash; a tool used in both educational and professional settings &ndash; to identify the value proposition and potential monetization strategies. Throughout the class, students will be introduced to tools in the IT design space through hands-on problem solving, role playing, and improvisation, among other techniques. A critical part of this course is the in-class coaching that teams will receive from the instructor, as well as guest speakers who can demonstrate the real world challenges of entrepreneurship and innovation. Frequent communication practice using techniques such as idea pitches will help students refine their ability to express their ideas more effectively.
CMPSC 447: Software Security	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	Problem-based approach to technology integration by focusing on real-life problems faced by an organization.  
CMPSC 448: Machine Learning and Algorithmic AI	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	 Information Sciences and Technology Integration and Problem Solving (3) This course is the undergraduate capstone for Information Sciences and Technology majors in the Baccalaureate degree. It requires students to work collaboratively in teams of 4-6 students, with each team comprised of students from more than one option and, if possible, more than one campus. Each team is given a significant real-world problem or issue in which information technology is part of the solution. Teams will be expected to manage the project effectively and to communicate its results clearly to a variety of audiences within an organization. Major topics include: review of problem-based and case-based learning; overview of project management practices; assessment of organizational and technical issues posed by the scenario; development and testing of work plans and analysis of options; communication within the group; communication within a management environment; and presentation of results to a variety of audiences inside and outside the organization. IST students need to understand the organizational and social contexts in which technology functions. Indeed, many technology problems are multi-dimensional--they have an economic dimension, a legal dimension, a human resources dimension, and so on. This course will require students to analyze, evaluate, and test alternative solutions and to weigh their advantages and disadvantages for the organization. Students will be evaluated in three ways: by the effectiveness of their team's solution of the technical or organizational problem; by the quality of the students' written and oral presentations; and by the quality of their project management and internal communication. A substantial written paper will be required of each student and each time; in addition, each team will also construct a Web-site for sharing results. Other technologies will be used as required by the project. It is expected that membership on teams of students will be drawn from the various options in the Information Sciences and Technology major. At least nine credits (including at least one IST 300-level and one IST 400-level course) in the student's option must be completed before enrollment in 
CMPSC 450: Concurrent Scientific Programming	3 Credits	. This course should be offered every fall and spring semester beginning in the fall semester 2002. It will be taught in sections of 25 and have a total enrollment of approximately 100 per semester.
CMPSC 451: Numerical Computations	3 Credits	The practices and foundations of access to textual and nontextual information using the principles of information retrieval and web search. Introductory course for seniors and graduate students covering the practices, issues, and theoretical foundations of organizing and analyzing information and information content for the purpose of providing access to textual and nontextual information resources. Introduces students to the principles of information storage and retrieval systems and databases.  
CMPSC 455: Introduction to Numerical Analysis I	3 Credits	 Information Retrieval and Organization (3) This is an introductory course for Information Sciences and Technology senior and graduate students covering the practices, issues, and theoretical foundations of organizing and analyzing information and information content for the purpose of providing access to textual and non-textual information resources. This course will introduce students to the principles of information storage and retrieval systems and databases. Students will learn how effective information search and retrieval is interrelated with the organization and description of information to be retrieved. Students will also learn to use a set of tools, such as search engines, and procedures for organizing information. They will become familiar with the techniques involved in conducting effective searches of information resources.
CMPSC 456: Introduction to Numerical Analysis II	3 Credits	International concepts to improve strategies for the design, dissemination, and use of information technology.  
CMPSC 457: Computer Graphics Algorithms	3 Credits	 Information Technology in an International Context (3) (IL) 
CMPSC 458: Fundamentals of Computer Graphics	3 Credits	 focuses on the implications of the international context for the design, diffusion and use of information technology. The course will provide students with an understanding of the three crucial IT-related characteristics of the international context: 1. information infrastructure, 2. the economic and policy environment, and 3. social and cultural structures. Students will develop analytic skills that will enable them to predict the implications of the international context for information technology and will apply these skills in a final project that addresses a problem in the areas such as information systems integration, interface design, or management of information technology projects.
CMPSC 459: Scientific Visualization	3 Credits	This course covers trends in globalization and their influence on U.S. policy making as well as the role of the U.S. in international issues.
CMPSC 460: Principles of Programming Languages	3 Credits	An interdisciplinary course that introduces students to process and techniques involved in developing a video or computer game.  
CMPSC 461: Programming Language Concepts	3 Credits	 An Introduction to Building Computer/Video Games (3) The course is project driven. Students will form teams and collaborate with one another to develop an interactive immersive experience. During the course, students will be exposed to several techniques for building graphical 3D worlds, animating characters, moving the camera and lights in real-time, and building intelligent characters (using state machine-based architectures). They will also learn different techniques of interactive storytelling, such as linear narrative, branching narrative, and adaptive narrative. Furthermore, they will be introduced to several tools that will aid in realizing their own projects and ideas, such as graphic engines (e.g. Wildtangent), and game engines (e.g. Unreal Tournament).The course is heavily project driven. Students will, in the first half of the course, learn the tools used in the development of interactive 3D environments. They will submit 2 individual assignments using these tools to develop a simple interactive environment. These individual assignments will be graded and critiqued.In the second half of the course, students will work on a game idea from generation to actual implementation. Students will be grouped in teams of three to develop a project, integrating concepts they learned through the class. They will use one or more of the tools they learned to build this project. Projects will be continuously evaluated and critiqued during game tuning sessions. In addition, projects will be formally evaluated through two prototypes that are critiqued by the class and the instructor. The students will continuously revise their designs and projects through the semester. The final version of the system is due by the end of the semester.
CMPSC 462: Data Structures	3 Credits	This project-oriented course provides students with the knowledge and skills necessary to conduct a sponsored research and keyword advertising-based marketing campaign This course offers the students an opportunity to gain knowledge and hands on experience on sponsored search and keyword advertising. In this course, students will gain knowledge and skills to advertise products and services using keyword advertising. Strategies for developing successful advertising campaigns will be discussed, including targeting potential customers based on the geo-location, applying A/B testing to identify the feasible advertising set-up, and organizing keywords with various products and services for effective management. In addition, various tools will be introduced to students for facilitating efficient and effective performance. By participating in a firm-based project, the students will acquire the experience of business consulting for advertising using current web-based techniques.
CMPSC 463: Design and Analysis of Algorithms	3 Credits	This course will explore the digital advertising "ecosystem," identify key players and trends, and review programmatic media buying.  COMM (IST) 450B Digital Advertising (3) Beyond keyword advertising, digital has transformed many industry activities related to buying and delivering advertising. Information technology and big data have revolutionized the way media and content providers interact and negotiate with advertisers, agencies and third parties. This course will explore the digital advertising and media "ecosystem," identify key players and trends, lay out the basics of digital advertising campaign management, and review performance analysis and evaluation. Students passing this class will be able to take the Interactive Advertising Bureau Digital Media Sales certification exam. Students can opt to take the exam any point in time,while it's not required.
CMPSC 464: Introduction to the Theory of Computation	3 Credits	Fundamental issues and concepts of network security, network security technologies and protocols, and emerging technologies in network security.  
CMPSC 465: Data Structures and Algorithms	3 Credits	 Network Security (3) Information technology has become a key component to support critical infrastructure services in various sectors of our society. In an effort to share information and streamline operations, organizations are creating complex networked systems and opening their networks to customers, suppliers, and other business partners. Increasing network complexity, greater access, and a growing emphasis on the Internet have made information/network security a major concern for organizations.
CMPSC 467: Factorization and Primality Testing	3 Credits	 focuses on network security. The course will provide the students with a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental issues and concepts of network security, and the mainstream network security technologies and protocols that are widely used in the real world. The course will also address emerging technologies in network security.A major component of the course will be several team-based hands-on attack-defense projects. Each project has two phases: the attack phase and the defense phase. A group may be asked to defend against the attacks enforced by another group. This course will incorporate collaborative and action-learning experiences wherever appropriate. Emphasis will be placed on developing and practicing writing and speaking skills through application of the concepts, theories and technologies that define the course.
CMPSC 469: Formal Languages with Applications	3 Credits	Exploration of legal, regulatory, public policy, and ethical issues related to security and privacy for information technology professionals in public institutions, private enterprise, and IT services.  
CMPSC 470: Compiler Construction	3 Credits	 Legal and Regulatory Environment of Privacy and Security (3) Institutional constraints on security historically focused on traditional criminal enforcement and a slow but steady increase in civil remedies through the twentieth century. Professional security protection could satisfy reasonable assurance criteria by managing legal and regulatory risks based on commonly-held understandings of burglary, theft, conversion and widely-understood but related institutional constraints in the protection of physical property. This focus retained effectiveness so long as physical security over tangible property appeared successful, even extending to the maintenance of control over mainframe computers and their peripherals. However, the proliferation of networked computers has made access and storage ubiquitous, vastly increasing the vulnerability of confidential data, private information and critical national security infrastructure. Security and privacy regulation compliance responsibility now falls much more harshly on both organizations and most of their individual personnel. These complex new duties constrain organizations in the data management industry as well as suppliers and users of data and all participants in the information supply chain, including consultants, software suppliers, applications service providers, maintenance, outsourcing and communications providers.Other factors exacerbate these liability risk management difficulties. Advances in network computer storage and use, the broadening perception of heightened value of information and the pervasive availability of rich data warehousing increase the vulnerability of data management. Risks of information theft and integrity losses as well as the explosion of privacy rights and national security concerns now require pervasive and fuller understanding of liability risk management principles/techniques among all managers and subordinates in the data management industry and in government. Information suppliers, handlers, owners and network service providers are increasingly exposed to civil litigation, regulatory oversight/compliance and criminal prosecution for various information-related wrongs. For example, confidentiality is compulsory for corporate trade secrets, privacy is required for personally identifiable information about individuals and secrecy is mandatory over matters of national security; all of which create complex legal duties that are fundamentally driving the design of information handling processes. This course surveys legal and regulatory constraints on information security and privacy practices.
CMPSC 471: Introduction to Compiler Construction	3 Credits	Legal, regulatory and public policy environment of computer and network forensics that constrain investigatory and monitoring activities in computer and network environments.  
CMPSC 472: Operating System Concepts	3 Credits	 Legal, Regulatory, Policy Environment of Cyber Forensics (3) This course covers the major legal, regulatory and policy issues in cyber-forensics including, pre-trail discovery, production of electronic documents (electronic data discovery or EDD), custody, EDD cost balancing, admissibility of electronic evidence, &ldquo;business records,&rdquo; expert witness roles and qualification, constitutional rights to privacy and confidentiality, privilege, litigation support, forensic service providers, document retention standards, legal constraints on electronic records management, EDD employment policies, key EDD laws, civil, criminal and regulatory procedure and evidence, litigation holds, spoliation, obstruction of justice, interaction with inside and outside service providers and counsel, EDD strategy, audit trails, and multi-disciplinary relations with computer and network forensic experts. Students are exposed to the failure and successes of particular cyber forensic techniques in the dominant legal and regulatory forums.
CMPSC 473: Operating Systems Design & Construction	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Fundamental issues and concepts of computer forensics; aspects of computer and cyber crime; methods to uncover, protect, exploit, and document digital evidence; tools, techniques, and procedure to perform computer and cyber crime investigation.  
CMPSC 474: Operating System & Systems Programming	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 Computer and Cyber Forensics (3) Computer and communication technologies have become the key components to support critical infrastructure services in various sectors of our society. In an effort to share information and streamline operations, organizations are creating complex networked systems and opening their networks to customers, suppliers, and other business partners. Increasing network complexity, greater access, and a growing emphasis on the Internet have made information and network security a major concern for organizations.
CMPSC 475: Applications Programming	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 focuses on computer and cyber forensics. Students will learn different aspects of computer and cyber crime and ways in which to uncover, protect, exploit, and document digital evidence. Students will be exposed to different types of tools (both software and hardware), techniques and procedure, and be able to use them to perform rudimentary forensic investigations.A major component of the course will be several hands-on exercises and a final team-based project. This course will incorporate collaborative and action-learning experiences wherever appropriate. Emphasis will be placed on developing and practicing writing and speaking skills through application of the concepts, theories and technologies that define the course.Integrated throughout are perspectives of computer and related legal process, including computer crimes from state and federal law, methods of interaction with law enforcement and prosecutors, admissibility of expert witness testimony and the use of forensic reports in civil, regulatory and internal investigations.
CMPSC 483W: Software Design Methods	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Contemporary Security Issues; security management processes, architecture and models; risk analysis and management; security planning, analysis and safeguards; security policies development and administration; contingency planning, incidence handling and response; and security standards and certification processes.  
CMPSC 484: Computer Science Senior Project I	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 Information Security Management (3) Communication technologies have become a key component to support critical infrastructure services in various sectors of our society. In an effort to share information and streamline operations, organizations are creating complex networked systems and opening their networks to customers, suppliers, and other business partners. Increasing network complexity, greater access, and a growing emphasis on the Internet have made information systems and network security a major concern for organizations. 
CMPSC 485W: Computer Science Senior Project II	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 focuses on security and risk management. Students will learn contemporary security issues; security management processes, architecture and models; risk analysis and management; security planning, analysis and safeguards; security policies development and administration; contingency planning, incidence handling and response; and security standards and certification processes.A major component of the course will be several case studies and a final team-based project. This course will incorporate collaborative and action-learning experiences wherever appropriate. Emphasis will be placed on developing and practicing writing and speaking skills through application of the concepts, theories and technologies that define the course.
CMPSC 487W: Software Engineering and Design	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	Introduces advanced topics in database management systems that are fundamental  to effective administration of enterprise information systems.  
CMPSC 488: Computer Science Project	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 Database Management and Administration (3) The objective of the course is to enable a student to comprehend principles of database management and administration. The students will learn how data are stored (indexing), accessed (query processing), shared (currency and transactions), and controlled (security). Students will be creating and using these features in a database in the laboratory. They can then develop, use, and tune database systems and applications, utilizing advanced database management features. This course assumes basic familiarity with relational model, Entity-Relationship diagram, SQL query language, and normalization (as covered in 
CMPSC 494: Senior Honors Thesis	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	). It builds the foundation on more advanced concepts of database systems that are fundamental to a career in database administration.
CMPSC 495: Internship	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	This course introduces advanced topics in database modeling and applicaitons.  
CMPSC 496: Independent Studies	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 Database Modeling and Applications (3) The objective of the course is to enable a student to comprehend advanced database modeling and their applications. Students will model requirements using the advanced techniques and implement various applications in different domains. This course assumes basic familiarity with relational model, Entity-Relationship diagram, SQL query language, and normalization (as covered in 
CMPSC 497: Special Topics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	). This course will cover more advanced topics in database modeling and database applications.
CMPSC 499: Foreign Studies	1 Credits	Seminar course focused on approaches to studying information and communication technologies and writing theses and other research reports.  IST 489H Research Methods for the Information Sciences and Technology (3) IST 489H provides students the opportunity to learn and experience: 1) Conceptualizing what are information and communications technologies. 2) Approaches to conducting research on, and reporting results of studies, of ICT. 3) The research process and its academic context.The course is designed around a series of ill-structured, contemporary, problems that require students to develop responses by applying research approaches to ICT. At the end of the course, students will be able to: 1) Apply different conceptualizations of ICT to common problems. 2) Select and initiate research on ICT. 3) Begin writing research-oriented work such as theses and papers.
ECON 14: Principles of Economics	1 Credits	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
ECON 102: Introductory Microeconomic Analysis and Policy	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	This course is the mechanism by which students in the Schreyer Honors College who are conducting research with a faculty member affiliated with the IST undergraduate major will register for thesis credits. The course includes activities related to research, scholarship, and/or writing necessary for the completion of an approved honors thesis.
ECON 102H: Introductory Microeconomic Analysis and Policy (Honors)	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Supervised on or off-campus, nongroup instruction including field experiences, practica, or internships.  Written and oral critique of activity required.
ECON 104: Introductory Macroeconomic Analysis and Policy	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, that are supervised on an individual basis and that fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ECON 104H: Introductory Macroeconomic Analysis and Policy (Honors)	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 106: Statistical Foundations for Econometrics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 106H: Statistical Foundations for Econometrics (Honors)	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Provides introduction to the field of Security and Risk Analysis and assessments of key skills.  SRA 001S First-Year Seminar in Security and Risk Analysis (1) SRA 001S gives first-year students a concrete overview of the field of Security and Risk Analysis (SRA), including discussion of the knowledge and competencies required for careers in this field, familiarity with the variety of career paths and the specific requirements of each, and an understanding of the skills, abilities and knowledge that is common across career paths within this field. As part of this course, students will participate in a Developmental Assessment Center, which will assess their current skill levels in the areas of Oral and Written Communication, Leadership, Conflict Resolution, Decision Making and Problem Solving, as well as other core areas to be identified. Working with the assessment team, the will create specific, individualized plans to develop skills in areas where they are currently deficient and to build on current strengths.
ECON 197: Special topics	1-12 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 199: Foreign Studies	1-12 Credits	This introductory course spans areas of security, risk, and analysis covering contexts in government agencies and business organizations.  
ECON 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	 Introduction to Security and Risk Analysis (3) Introduction to Security and Risk Analysis is a preliminary course with a broad focus, spanning the areas of security, risk and analysis. In addition to familiarizing the student with basic technical terminology, it will also touch upon social and legal issues, risk analysis and mitigation, crime intelligence and forensics, and information warfare and assurance.This course will motivate students to understand the requirements for security in any government agency or business organization through the use of case studies. Included in this segment are cases related to cyberterrorism, bioterrorism, and critical infrastructure protection. Some concepts to be covered in the area of information security are: confidentiality, integrity, availability, and non-repudiation. Various methods of safeguarding these security concerns will be discussed, such as: single- and multi-factor authentication, encryption, digital signatures, prevention of denial of service attacks, and so forth. This course also covers social and legal issues related to security, in particular identity theft and social engineering. Topics in this section include identity theft, spam, spyware, and adware. This course also covers the principles and the approaches to risk analysis. Here students study vulnerability analysis, crime and intelligence analysis, forensics, techniques for risk assessment and risk mitigation.The course will prepare students for more in-depth courses such as 
ECON 299: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	, 
ECON 302: Intermediate Microeconomic Analysis	3 Credits	 and 
ECON 302H: Intermediate Microeconomic Analysis (Honors)	3 Credits	.
ECON 304: Intermediate Macroeconomic Analysis	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 304H: Intermediate Macroeconomic Analysis (Honors)	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 306: Introduction to Econometrics	3 Credits	Provides overview of nature, scope, and seriousness of threats to security as a result of terrorism and crime.  
ECON 306H: Introduction to Econometrics	3 Credits	 Threat of Terrorism and Crime (3) Threat of Terrorism and Crime is a course designed to acquaint students with the security threats posed by both terrorist and criminal activity, and with strategies to combat these threats. Terrorism and security are defined as well as terrorism in its historical context. Varieties of terrorist groups, organizations and their actions are studied with targets of terrorism being a focus. Types of crime including street, employee, organized and white collar crime are studied.Information theft can occur in each of the types of crime. Security threats of each type are studied and mitigation techniques are evaluated. Methods of studying terrorism and crime cover data collection, analysis of the reliability of the data, and fusing the data so that information is obtained that leads to knowledge to combat terrorism and crime.Finally to put the course in perspective, students study critical shortfalls in our understanding of terrorism and crime including unreliable data, biased estimates and a lack of understanding of terrorist and criminal motives and objectives.
ECON 315: Labor Economics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Provides an understanding of the overview of information security including security architecture, access control, and internet secure applications.  
ECON 323: Public Finance	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 Overview of Information Security (3) 
ECON 333: International Economics	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 focuses onan overview of information security. Students will learn the principles of information security, security architectures and models, aspects and methods of information security such as physical security control, operations security, access control, hacks/attacks/defense, systems and programs security, cryptography, network and web security, worms and viruses, and other Internet secure applications. Students will also learn how to plan and manage security, security policies, business continuity plans, disaster recovery plans, and social and legal issues of information security.A major component of the course will be several hands-on exercises and a final team-based project. This course will incorporate collaborative and action-learning experiences wherever appropriate. Emphases will be placed on developing and practicing writing and speaking skills through application of the concepts, theories and technologies that define the course.
ECON 342: Industrial Organization	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	Provides an overview of decision theoretical and analytical concepts and tools in the security risk analysis field.  
ECON 351: Money and Banking	1-9 Credits	 Decision Theory and Analysis (3) Decision Theory and Analysis is designed for students to build an understanding of how to improve the judgment and decision making of individuals, groups and organizations. Behavioral decision theories provide the theoretical core for the course. These theories draw on insights from a diverse set of disciplines, including cognitive and social psychology as well as economics, statistics and philosophy.Offered annually (and more if demand requires), this course will foster understanding of: (a) the cognitive, emotional, social and institutional factors that influence judgment and choice, (b) normative (economic) models of rational choice, and (c) how judgment and decision making can be predicted and/or improved through prescriptive aids and models.Applications of these theories and methods to real-life venues will be used to engage and focus the students. For example, insights on how such concepts apply to supply chain security, bioterrorism threats, legal decision making, large-scale risk assessments (e.g., assessing risks of transnational threat), and first-response/crisis decision making will be common. Where appropriate, real situations and cases are used to bring concepts and scenarios alive.Overall, the course emphasizes basic skills and concepts that enhance an individual&rsquo;s ability to understand why individuals, groups and organizations behave the way they do, how they formulate the issues and problems they confront, as well as to choose rationally among competing courses of action.
ECON 395: Internship	1-9 Credits	This course introduces the fundamental principles, methods, and tools of visual analytics that enable security and risk analysts to synthesize information and derive insight from massive, dynamic, ambiguous, and often conflicting data. Decisions in risk and security management are increasingly driven by data. Analysts are faced with a continuously growing set of data originated from a wide range of sources and in a wide variety of formats. Such data need to be analyzed in order to understand a situation and react promptly. This causes significant information overload to analysts and prevents them from developing good situation awareness. Visual Analytics (VA) offers an effective solution for making sense of massive datasets by exploiting interactive visualization technologies to extend human cognitive abilities. It helps analysts in detecting the expected and discover the unexpected, providing timely, defensible, and in communicating findings and assessment effectively for action. 
ECON 397: Special Topics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 provides students with a quick overview of the current state of the art in visual analytics and their applications in data-driven security investigation and risk assessment. It prepares students with advanced data analytic skills and critical thinking with data. Cases studies and projects showcase the applications of visual analytics in cyber security and intelligence analysis, emergency and crisis management, and business intelligence.
ECON 399: Foreign Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
ECON 400M: Honors Seminar in Economics	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, that are supervised on an individual basis and that fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ECON 401: History of Economic Thought	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 402: Decision Making and Strategy in Economics	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 404: Current Economic Issues	3 Credits	Assessment and mitigation of security vulnerabilities for people, organizations, industry sectors, and the nation.  
ECON 404W: Current Economic Issues	3 Credits	 Risk Management: Assessment and Mitigation (3) Risk Analysis in a Security Context is focused on developing analytical skills aimed at producing credible and meaningful answers to critical questions of risk management. Risk is considered at all levels within this course, including those created by intelligent adversaries, including cybercriminals and terrorists, although risks may also include natural disasters, system failures, accidents, etc. Students successfully completing this course are capable of applying a diverse set of analytic techniques to answer questions in contexts such as information security, counterterrorism and intelligence, or any other particular field where protection is an issue. Topics in this course include critical thinking, systems analysis, risk assessment and associated analysis methods, risk communication, and risk control. &nbsp;
ECON 406: The Economics of Social Conflict	3 Credits	This intermediate course is appropriate for students majoring in Security and Risk Analysis. This course provides students with the background, experience and perspective required to document risk and identify policies and procedures that effectively deal with hazards and threats to which the organization is vulnerable, jeopardizing its mission. This writing intensive course requires students to identify and assess organization risks, and recommend controls to executive decision makers. Individual and group writing assignments provide practical experience preparing organizational-level documents that effectively communicate the risk context, risk analysis (e.g., identification and assessment), risk communication, and risk control elements for a risk management plan. Students receive and provide peer feedback on writing assignments, as well as instructor feedback, with the goal of improving writing skills and conforming writing styles to organization and industry expectations.
ECON 407: Political Economy	1-9 Credits	Theoretical foundations and practice of intermediate statistics.  
ECON 407W: Political Economy	1-9 Credits	 Statistics for Security and Risk Analysis (3) 
ECON 408: Intellectual Property	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 is an intermediate-level statistics course emphasizing how to summarize data using descriptive statistics, how to make data-driven decisions using inferential statistics, and how to critically evaluate data presented in the media, all within the context of security, risk, and analysis. This is both a theory and application course. Students will learn about statistical theories, such as regression, and chi-square analyses, and apply their knowledge of these theories by analyzing and interpreting data using a statistical software package.
ECON 408W: Intellectual Property	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 409: Economics of Terrorism	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 409W: Economics of Terrorism	3 Credits	The Role of information and intelligence introduces students to the architecture and policies of the U.S. Intelligence Community (IC) and examines how U.S. intelligence policies and practices relate to overall U.S. foreign policy objectives and are influenced by today's global enviroment and emerging technologies.  The course examines the users and processes of IC, participants of Competitive Intelligence, and comparative intelligence communities.  
ECON 410: Economics of Labor Markets	3 Credits	 The Intelligence Environment (3) This course examines intelligence structures and policies and explores the role and use of information and intelligence in the 21st Century, in support of individual citizens, national defense and corporate America. It will introduce the major actors in the U.S. intelligence community and frame U.S. intelligence policies in terms of overall U.S. foreign policy objectives in the current globalized international arena. The course discusses the history and evolution of U.S. intelligence policies, capabilities and information requirements as well as the legal and constitutional foundations of those policies. The course will examine and apply methods and techniques of the information user and intelligence practitioner. The course will also provide experience in applying principles and techniques learned in the context of a team-based intelligence-analysis simulation exercise.
ECON 411: Behavioral Economics	3 Credits	Deception tactics, technologies and procedures and approaches to counterdeception analysis.  
ECON 411W: Behavioral Economics	3 Credits	 Deception and Counterdeception (3) This course introduces deception and counterdeception and their role in support of security risk analyses in competitive environments. The course covers fundamental theories of deception, human cognition and its vulnerabilities to deception, and the vulnerabilities of technical collection systems and sensors to deception. The course discusses deceptive practices in use by attackers and defenders, including both non-technical and technical means. The course also provides experience applying technical and non-technical counterdeception techniques to security risk analysis problems.
ECON 412: Labor Economics and Labor Markets: Theory, Evidence, and Policy	3 Credits	This course is designed to provide IST seniors enrolled in the SRA major to experience a semester-long security and risk analysis scenario or problem-solving exercise by providing realistic analytic dilemmas requiring solutions that incorporate facets of the three SRA Options. The problems selected for the Capstone should lend themselves to team collaboration and group solutions.
ECON 413: Economic Growth and the Challenges of World Poverty	3 Credits	Cyber-crime and cyber-warfare are among the most critical areas facing information security professionals. Both have emerged as strategic issues facing the United States. This importance is recognized by NSA, DHS and industry. This course will familiarize students with the history, tools, methods, players, laws and policies regarding cyber-crime and cyber-warfare. This course will add to the offerings in the MPS Information Security and Forensics major as well as the SRA BS ICS and IAM options.
ECON 413W: Economic Growth and the Challenge of World Poverty	3 Credits	Introduce visual analytic techniques for security informatics and intelligence.  It covers analytical techniques on visualizing threats, risk, and vulnerability.  
ECON 414: The Economic Way of Looking at Life	3 Credits	 Visual Analytics for Security Intelligence (3)This course surveys techniques for visualizing and analyzing security information and for communicating and using information about threats, risk and vulnerability to decision-makers. It will motivate students by the needs for better intelligence in a broad range of homeland security applications. Through case studies and problem-based learning, students will develop understanding of important concepts and issues, such as data source and data quality, associations and integration of incidence, hazards, and risk factors, and the difficulties of analyzing and communicating knowledge. Various visual analytical methods for homeland security intelligence will be discussed, such as : (1) mapping and visualizing patterns of crime and incidence, (2) identifying targets and agents of terrorist attacks, (3) spatial analysis of social, economic and environmental risk indicators, and (4) prediction of threat and risk. It also pays special attention to the interpretation of analytical results for actions. Geographical information systems and associated spatial analytical tools will be used to exemplify the kinds of information environment available to intelligence community. The course will prepare students to become immediate workforce for security-related industries and government agencies.
ECON 415: The Economics of Global Climate Change	3 Credits	Provides in-depth study of how security informatics is influenced by the risk and post-modern culture.  
ECON 415W: The Economics of Global Climate Change	3 Credits	 Informatics, Risk, and the Post-Modern World (3)The post-modern world provides a changing climate and context for defining and understanding threats, intelligence, decisions, and risk. Likewise, post-modern cultures consist of beliefs that are heavily influenced by psychology, social connectivity, collective behavior, religion, ethnicity, and political systems. This system of systems is heavily dependent upon and influenced by information, information technology, and the web (social informatics). When examining human behavior as it impacts risk, these various social-technical factors must be considered in planning for terrorism, intelligence analysis, and emergency events. As the post-modern world becomes increasingly complicated, the ability to discern, identify, and address threats in terms of risk becomes exceedingly more difficult. Provision of learning underlying psychological, social, political, religious, and technical components of how risk accelerates through various stages will be critical for protection of national and international interests within the security sphere. Security informatics will be at the heart of both recognizing emerging situations and employing tools/agents/measures to assuage emergency, terrorist, or even national disaster events. This course provides the student with a broad perspective to critically examine both theories and practice of security informatics as related to the cultures in which threats emerge asymmetrically. Students will be placed on the role of systems analysts to problem solve and analyze information from a broad bandwidth of information specifically as informed by culture, post-modern thought, psychological intent, and situation awareness. The course will be grounded by participation in case studies and/or analyzing exercises of risk. Students will be required to do comprehensive reading assignments, engage in team cognition-social interaction, and become familiar with social informatics concepts and tools as related to risk, terrorism, and information warfare. As the post-modern world becomes increasingly complicated, the ability to discern, identify, and address threats in terms of risk becomes exceedingly more difficult. Provision of understanding some of the underlying psychological, social, political, religious, and technical components of how risk accelerates through various stages will be critical for protection of national and international interests within the security sphere. As extreme events become more prevalent in society, security informatics will be at the heart of both recognizing emerging situations and employing tools/agents to assuage emergency, terrorist, or even national disaster events.
ECON 417: The Economics of Uncertainty	3 Credits	Exploration of technological, operational, organizational and regulatory issues related to maintenance of individual privacy, confidentiality of organizations, and information protection.  
ECON 417W: The Economics of Uncertainty	3 Credits	 Integration of Privacy and Security (3)This course is designed to introduce students to the major organizational, technical, operational and regulatory issues in information privacy and security, and to give them experience in performing a privacy analysis, designing privacy-aware applications and developing privacy policy in organizations. Topics covered include: conceptualizations and theories of privacy and security, privacy laws and compliance, building a privacy organizational infrastructure, integrating privacy in the software development process, performing a privacy analysis, privacy issues in outsourcing and cross-border data transfers, integrating privacy into customer relationship management and vendor management, information systems audit and intentional standards on privacy and security. This course will mix technical details, applied value and organizational insights of assuring privacy and security through the use of case studies, real-life problems, hands-on exercises and team projects.
ECON 421: Analysis of Economic Data	3 Credits	This course examines how information and communication technologies have played a role in saving livesspecifically in the areas of technologies used toward emergency response. It explores disaster response and the inter-connectedness of information, people, and technologies in a crisis. In particular, it examines how information is managed, organized, coordinated, and disseminated during a crisis; it analyzes information needs and seeking behaviors during a crisis, and explores how information and communication technologies can support communities in a crisis. Students reflect on lessons learned from past crises, and develop strategies to manage future crises. This course will equip students with the knowledge and skills to enable them to be key players in crisis response.
ECON 422: Applying Monetary Theory and Monetary History	3 Credits	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
ECON 422W: Applying Monetary Theory to Monetary History	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, that are supervised on an individual basis and that fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ECON 424: Income Distribution	1-12 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 425: Economics of Public Expenditures	1-12 Credits	Introduction to computer fundamentals and applications to data processing environments.
ECON 427: Economics of Energy and Energy Security	1-18 Credits	This course introduces the fundamental concepts and processes of solving computational problems through the design, implementation, testing, and evaluation of basic computer programs. The concepts include basic computational constructs such as calculation, iteration, conditions, functions, and data types. These provide the basic building blocks found in virtually all programming languages. The processes include the step-by-step refinement of a problem description into individual components that can be implemented, tested, and integrated into an effective solution. As a general education course, the central theme to the course is computational thinking which includes a wide range of approaches to solving problems and designing systems that draw upon concepts fundamental to computer science. Computational thinking includes thinking about various types and sources of data, and the correctness, efficiency, elegance, and simplicity of various potential solutions. Computational thinking is applying principles of abstraction at multiple levels to focus on important details; it is applying problem decomposition to identify small problems that can be individually solved then combined to form a solution to the original problem. Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to conceptualize and implement computational solutions to problems; to utilize the imperative model of computation to solve problems; to reason about problems at multiple levels of abstraction; and to analyze code for its behavior, efficiency, and correctness. A student may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ECON 428: Environmental Economics	1-18 Credits	, 
ECON 429: Public Finance and Fiscal Policy	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	, 
ECON 430: Regional Economic Analysis	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	, 
ECON 432: Urban Economics	3 Credits	, 
ECON 433: Advanced International Trade Theory and Policy	3 Credits	
ECON 434: International Finance and Open Economy Macroeconomics	3 Credits	Problem solving for non-majors; high-level language programming; controlstructures, functions, parameters, recursion, arrays, records/ structures; verification; debugging; documentation.
ECON 436: Economics of Discrimination	3 Credits	An introduction to logic and its application to problem solving and computer science.  CMPSC 111S Logic for Computer Science (1)Computer Science provides the fundamental tools for analyzing problems and designing solutions to these problems which can be implemented on a computer. Logic plays an important role in this process, from a general-purpose tool for reasoning about knowledge to a special-purpose language for specifying the behavior of programs and designing hardware. This course examines the role of logic in problem solving and its application to computer science and computer engineering. Example problems will be drawn from a variety of sources, including brain teasers, puzzles, and mathematics. We will show how these problems and their solutions apply to real problems involving computers. We will also explore a number of the important areas of computer science and computer engineering including Boolean and Digital Logic, Designing Arithmetic Hardware, Cryptography and Security Programming Languages, Networking and Wireless Communication, Artificial Intelligence, and Computer Ethics.
ECON 436W: Economics of Discrimination	3 Credits	Design and implementation of algorithms.  Structured programming.  Problem solving techniques.  Introduction to a high-level language, including arrays, procedures, and recursion.
ECON 437: Multinationals and the Globalization of Production	3 Credits	Object-oriented programming, recursion, fundamental data structures (including stacks, queues, linked lists, hash tables, trees, and graphs), the basics of algorithmic analysis, and an introduction to the principles of language translation.
ECON 437W: Multinationals and the Globalization of Production	1 Credits	Object-oriented programming, recursion, fundamental data structures (including stacks, queues, linked lists, hash tables, trees, and graphs), the basics of algorithmic analysis, and an introduction to the principles of language translation.
ECON 438: Winners and Losers from Globalization	1 Credits	This course introduces the fundamental concepts and processes of solving computational problems through the design, implementation, testing and evaluation of efficient and robust computer programs. The concepts include basic computational constructs found in imperative, object-oriented and functional programming languages such as iteration, conditionals, functions, recursion, and datatypes. These provide the basic building blocks found in virtually all programming languages. The processes include the stepwise refinement of a problem description into individual components that can be implemented, tested, and integrated into an effective solution. A central theme to the course is computational thinking which includes a wide range of approaches to solving problems and designing systems that draw upon concepts fundamental to computer science. Computational thinking includes thinking recursively, considering parallel processing, thinking about types and type checking, judging a program not just for correctness and efficiency but also for its esthetics, and judging a system design for its simplicity and elegance. Computational thinking is applying principles of abstraction at multiple levels to focus on important details; it is applying problem decomposition to identify small problems that can be individually solved then combined to form a solution to the original problem. Computational thinking uses program invariants to describe a system's behavior succinctly and declaratively. Computational thinking considers multiple models of computation when designing an effective solution to a problem.
ECON 438W: Winners and Losers from Globalization	3 Credits	This course builds upon the foundations of programming and computation by introducing and studying the data structures and programming language features that support the design and construction of large-scale software systems. It introduces the foundations of object-oriented programming, the design and analysis of efficient algorithms using important data structures, and programming techniques that support reusable and modular program components, including data abstraction, polymorphism, and higher-order functions. Topics from object-oriented programming include classes, objects, inheritance, methods, message passing, static and dynamic type checking. These topics form the core of most object-oriented languages and provide a foundation for learning more advanced language topics. Data structures capture the common organization of many kinds of data arising in the design of efficient solutions to computational problems. Specific data structures covered include stacks, queues, trees, graphs and linked lists. The design and analysis of efficient algorithms using these data structures provide a foundation for the study of computing, where understanding the complexity of a problem and the availability of efficient solutions are essential skills. Finally, topics including higher-order functional programming, data abstraction and parametric polymorphism, as well as principles from object-oriented programming, come together to support the design and implementation of modular, reusable and robust code.
ECON 442: Managerial Economics	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 443: Economics of Law and Regulation	3 Credits	Development and implementation of algorithms in a procedure-oriented language, with emphasis on numerical methods for engineering problems. A student may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ECON 444: Economics of the Corporation	3 Credits	, 
ECON 445: Health Economics	3 Credits	, 
ECON 445W: Health Economics	3 Credits	, 
ECON 446: Economics of Industry Evolution	3 Credits	, or 202.  
ECON 446W: Economics of Industry Evolution	3 Credits	 
ECON 447: Economics of Sports	3 Credits	 Programming for Engineers with MATLAB (3) 
ECON 447W: Economics of Sports	3 Credits	 is a service course offered to engineering and science majors. The course teaches basic programming concepts including: algorithm development, data types, number representation, control structures, functions, plotting and basic numerical analysis techniques. The course enables students to develop computer programs in MATLAB to solve simple engineering problems. The basic numerical analysis techniques covered in the course include matrix operations, systems of equations, solving equations, roots, curve fitting, interpolation, numerical integration and ordinary differential equations.Students analyze physics-based and engineering problems; develop algorithms to solve the problems; implement the algorithms in the MATLAB programming environment; and produce informative output in both numerical and graphical form. The general programming concepts learned in the course are commonly found in most programming language environments. The problem-solving skills learned in the course can be utilized in upper-level engineering and science courses.The lecture portion of the course gives students the conceptual and syntactical background needed for the successful completion of practical programming assignments during the laboratory portion of the course. The laboratory instruction involves hands-on programming by individual students or student teams assisted by a teaching assistant and/or instructor.Evaluation methods may include examinations, in-class labs, and programming projects. The course is generally held in a STEC room where each student has access to a computer. The course will be offered during the Spring semester.
ECON 448: Economics of Auctions and Procurements	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Development and implementation of algorithms in a procedure-oriented language, with emphasis on numerical methods for engineering problems.  A student may receive credit for only one of the following courses: 
ECON 448W: Economics of Auctions and Procurements	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	, 
ECON 449: Economics of Collusion	3 Credits	, 
ECON 449W: Economics of Collusion	3 Credits	, 
ECON 451: Monetary Theory and Policy	3 Credits	, or CMPSC 202.
ECON 452: Economics of the Financial Crisis	3 Credits	Design, use, and programming of spreadsheets and data bases with applications from a range of disciplines.
ECON 452W: Financial Crises	4 Credits	Introduction to the tools and techniques required to implement games in a virtual environment. 
ECON 454: Economics of Mergers	4 Credits	 / 
ECON 455: Economics of the Internet	3 Credits	 Technical Game Development.  First, students learn about game and player elements by creating characters and objects and the means of user interactivity. Both orthographic and perspective views are introduced to assist in character design. Objects and characters are created using fundamental geometric primitives like scale, rotation, translation and extrusion. The set operations, union, intersection, and subtraction, are applied to create compound objects. Bezier and NURB curves are introduced to create objects with irregular contours. Students also learn to design graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and handle mouse and keyboard events to support user interactions. Second, students are introduced to methods of storytelling and guide them to build narratives for games. Methods of proximity and collision detection in the environment are studied for both static and dynamic objects. Dynamic objects are programmed to move and behave in a deterministically, random, or probabilistically under a variety of lighting methods including ambient, directional, point and diffuse lights are introduced. A number of particle systems are developed with different considerations of randomness, vector direction and velocity. The concept of linear interpolation is illustrated and applied to texture mapping to improve the look and feel of objects. Third, students are introduced to functions, propositional logic, loops, and randomness to model game behavior. Students will learn to combine a series of primitive actions into a function for control and reuse. Propositional logic will guide students to define conditions and develop game rules. Loops are introduced to simplify the implementation of repeated game behavior. Randomness enables the simulation of many life-like object movements. Students will learn and practice how to write concurrent, event drive and sequential processing algorithms for game objects. Fourth, students are introduced to the game development process of pre-production, production and post-condition phases and have them apply it to their own project. The topic of maintenance will be introduced with an emphasis on refactoring techniques, critical to improving the quality of game and providing flexibility for future updates. This course has a significant applied element. Game engine tools are used to develop prototypes of games and playtest them. Lab assignments are given throughout the semester and a final project requires students to demonstrate mastery of all aspects of the course.
ECON 455W: Economics of the Internet	3 Credits	The course covers advanced object-oriented principles and their application to web-based, net-centric computing. Major topics include virtual machines, intermediate code generation (Java-specific), graphical user interfaces (GUI) design, event handling, server-side programming with database queries, and security, permissions and file management concepts for client/server systems. Extensive programming assignments provide an understanding of the entire process of client/server development including interface prototyping, program design, implementation of both client and server programs, unit testing, and documentation. This course prepares students to meet immediate demands in solving complex computational problems.
ECON 457: Economics of Organizations	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, which are supervised on an individual basis and which fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ECON 457W: Economics of Organizations	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 460: Issues in Sports Economics	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 463: Economic Demography	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	OO programming, visual programming, classes, objects, ADTs, inheritance, recursion, regular expressions, user-defined controls, documentation, testing, verification, productivity tools.  
ECON 465: Cross Sectional Econometrics	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 Intermediate Visual Programming (3) This course forms the second of a two course sequence of courses for non-major students. It is designed to build upon concepts and skills presented in the first course, 
ECON 466: Panel Data Models	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	, with the intent of enabling the student to develop larger scale programs and interface with databases and Web servers using a visual programming language. Some of the topics covered in this course will be object-oriented programming, inheritance, string manipulation, regular expressions, creating custom controls, creating controls dynamically, interfacing with databases and using an appropriate platform, such as ASPX.net to create web pages.This course forms the second of a two course sequence of courses for non-major students. It covers advanced features of the target language , building larger scale programs and interfaces to databases and web servers. It builds on the skills covered in CMPSC-102 and introduces creating new controls, dynamically placing controls at run time, arrays and lists of controls, the use of regular expressions, more in-depth treatment of classes and objects, including inheritance and polymorphism, multi-dimensional arrays, lists, unit testing and project deployment.
ECON 466W: Panel Data Models	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Unix system programming in C; organization of programs and data; program analysis and support tools; software standards; common system functions.  
ECON 470: International Trade and Finance	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 
ECON 471: Growth and Development	3 Credits	 Introduction to Systems Programming (3) System Programming concerns the development of software components and methods for their combination, independent of any particular application. This course will provide information and experience required to understand, design and implement components of large software systems.In general, students should be able to evaluate design alternatives according to standard practice, specifications, performance analysis, robustness, etc. To concentrate attention, we investigate one system and one programming language in detail, through demonstration programs, short- and long-term programming assignments. The specific system is Unix, a family of operating systems forming a complete standardized programming environment based on the idea of software tools. The specific language is C, which is widely used for operating system implementations, and which forms the basis for the C++ and Java languages studied in the prerequisite courses. This will help students understand operating system services available to application programmers, and provide a firm ground for study of operating systems in general.There are several themes of the course:(1) Understand computer systems, especially low-level influences on high-level goals. This includes the machine-level representation of programs and data structures; the memory hierarchy and its impact on performance; access to stored information via file systems, and access to other computer systems via networks.(2) Understand existing system software and software standards, especially the UNIX toolset. This includes preparing a program (editors, static analysis, development environments); running a program (compilers and interpreters, assembler, linker, loader, debugger, profiler, tracer); controlling parts of a program (memory management, threads); communication between programs (within one system using signals, between systems using sockets and communication protocols); and combinations of software tools with scripting languages.(3) Understand "real code", such as selections from the Linux operating system kernel and GNU utilities and libraries, and through comparative selections from Solaris, Linux, and Mac OS X.(4) Understand system performance, including experiments on program performance and optimization techniques.
ECON 472N: Russian Economic History	3 Credits	Data representation, digital logic, instruction set/control logic, machine/ assembly languages, advanced architectures, memory hierarchy, I/O devices, overall system design.
ECON 474: Experimental and Behavioral Economics	3 Credits	Program design, addressing modes, subroutines, parameter passing, stacks, bit manipulation, text processing, DOS functions, macros, I/O, high level language interfaces.  CMPSC 313CMPSC 313 Assembly Language Programming (3)This is a course in assembly language programming for IBM PCs and compatibles. Students will gain experience writing efficient, well-documented programs that are easily maintained. The course investigates the architecture and instruction set of a typical microcomputer based on the Intel 80x86 microprocessors. Topics include the basic structure of computers, the internal behavior of computers, program design, testing, debugging, machine architecture, addressing, BCD and binary arithmetic, subroutines and parameter passing, stacks, text processing, bit manipulation, DOS functions, macros, I/O routines, high level language interfaces and the assembly process.This course is important because assembly language is often used in programs where small size or fast execution is critical. Knowledge of assembly language is also useful in debugging programs written in high level languages. It also helps bridge the gap between hardware and high level languages.After successfully completing 
ECON 475: Migration and Development	3 Credits	, the student should be able to: explain the 80x86 architecture, including registers and segment:offset addressing; describe different ways data are represented in a computer and work with binary and hexadecimal numbers; describe the functions of an assembler; implement program designs in 80x86 assembly language, including: writing, documenting, testing and debugging a program in PC assembly language; manipulating strings; coding basic algorithms such as searching and sorting in assembly language; calling and passing parameters to subroutines; utilizing DOS functions; and interfacing with a high level language; explain how the underlying hardware affects software design and performance; appreciate the factors that contribute to program efficiency.Students will be evaluated on homework (35% of grade), semester exams (35%), and a final comprehensive exam (30%).The major only requires that a student have experience with assembly language programming. This course is intended for students who have not had any experience with assembly language programming before entering the program. It will also serve as an elective. The material learned in this course is beneficial in understanding concepts in the required courses CMPSC 422, 
ECON 475W: Migration and Development	3 Credits	, and 
ECON 477: Labor Markets in Developing Countries	3 Credits	, as well as in the elective courses CMPSC 428 and 
ECON 479: Economics of Matching	3 Credits	.No special facilities are required for this course. The software necessary is available in the computer labs or for students to use at home. This course will be offered once per year, with an expected enrollment of 55.
ECON 479W: Economics of Matching	3 Credits	Introduction to the composition of communciation networks, including trans- mission mediums and protocols, transfer methods, topologies and software, and communications hardware.
ECON 480: Mathematical Economics	3 Credits	Discrete mathematics and foundations for modern computer science.  Topics include sets, relations, logic, algorithms, graphs, finite state machines and regular expressions.
ECON 481: Business Forecasting Techniques	3 Credits	Supervised off-campus, nongroup instruction including field experiences, practica, or internships.  Written and oral critique of activity required.
ECON 483: Economic Forecasting	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
ECON 485: Econometric Techniques	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ECON 489M: Honors Thesis	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	Recommended Preparations: 
ECON 494: Research Project	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	; 
ECON 494A: Research Project	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	  This course introduces modern programming models and related software stacks for performing scalable data analytics and discovery tasks over massive and/or high dimensional datasets. The learning objectives of the course are that the students are able to choose appropriate programming models for a big data application, understand the tradeoff of such choice, and be able to leverage state-of-the art cyber infrastructures to develop scalable data analytics or discovery tasks. Building on data models covered in 
ECON 494H: Research Project	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	, this course will introduce programming models such as MapReduce, data flow supports for modern cluster computing environment, and programming models for large-scale clustering (either a large number of data samples or a large number of dimensions). Using these frameworks and languages, the students will learn to implement data aggregation algorithms, iterative algorithms, and algorithms for generating statistical information from massive and/or high-dimensional data. The realization of these algorithms will enable the students to develop data analytic models for massive datasets.
ECON 495: Internship	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Programming with common data structures; recursion; stacks, queues, dictionaries, priority queues; string searching and manipulation; sorting; trees; combinatorics.
ECON 496: Independent Studies	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Programming with common algorithm design techniques; divide and conquer, greedy method, dynamic programming, and tree and graphy traversals.
ECON 497: Special Topics	3 Credits	Programming Contest Questions; Common Data Structures; Strings; Sorting; Searching; Combinatorics; Number Theory; Graph Algorithms; Dynamic Programming. This course provides hands-on practice with a wide range of computer science topics that are used to solve programming contest questions. These topics include common data structures; strings; sorting; combinatorics; number theory; graph traversal and other algorithms; dynamic programming. In the course, students will solve a range of programming contest questions, both using an online judge in practice sessions and during actual programming contests. In addition to solving programming problems, the course time will also be used to explore topics mentioned above and the relationship to specific problems, solution techniques, and the analysis of proposed solutions to specific problems. This course is envisioned to be a hands-on lab, with instructor supported, self-guided study. The course topics will be chosen from topics that commonly appear in current programming contests, including but not limited to: - Contest Programming - Common Data Structures - Strings - Sorting - Combinatorics - Number Theory - Graph Traversal and Other Algorithms - Dynamic Programming
ECON 499: Foreign Study--Economics	3 Credits	This course introduces JavaScript and AJAX for creating Rich Internet Applications, and XML for client-server communication and Web Services. 
ENGL 1: Understanding Literature	1.5 Credits	 Net-centric Computing (3) This course will build on the client-server computing concepts and techniques that students learned about in prerequisite courses. The goal of the course is to introduce students to the most significant and fundamental of those technologies that are used in the computing paradigm known by a number of terms including  "Net-centric", "Web 2", and "cloud" computing. On the client: We will use Dynamic XHTML, Cascading Style Sheets, JavaScript and AJAX to develop the client side of Rich Internet (or Web) Applications. For client-server-communication: We will learn how to create and validate XML documents and use these as the primary language for transmission of data from the server to the client. We will also consider how JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) can sometimes be used as a viable alternative to XML for server to client data transmission. On the server: We will learn about a variety of server-side technologies for consuming, storing, transforming, and generating content. We will use the three main types of XML parsers to consume, transform, and generate XML; we will use XSL and XPath to style and transform XML; we will use XML binding tools to convert XML to and from classes (in some high-level language); we will use Data Access Objects and object-relational mapping tools for data persistence. We will learn how servers use Web services and RSS feeds to provide XML structured content, and we will consume existing Web services and RSS feeds and produce simple Web services.
ENGL 2: The Great Traditions in English Literature	1.5 Credits	Object-oriented analysis and design; design patterns such as creational, structural, and behavioral patterns; UML; and unified process. 
ENGL 2H: The Great Traditions in English Literature Honors	1.5 Credits	 Object-Oriented Design (3) The primary goal of this course is to study the object-oriented design paradigm, including modeling languages, classes and objects, the inheritance relationship, polymorphism, and software engineering topics relating to object-oriented design. Study of this topic should provide a solid understanding of object-orientation for students to use in studying diverse topics such as operating systems, software engineering, and database design. This course is an elective for students in the BS COMP program. The course builds on topics learned in earlier object-oriented programming courses.
ENGL 4: Basic Writing Skills	1.5 Credits	The main goal of this course is to explore the relational database model, with special emphasis on the design and querying of relational databases. Secondary goals include exploration of the mathematical basis for relational databases and exploration of the relationship of database to the rest of computer science. Study of these topics should improve student skills in programming, modeling the structure of data and using and administering databases. After completing 
ENGL 5: Writing Tutorial	1 Credits/Maximum of 4	 the student should be able to: (1) Demonstrate comprehension of general database concepts (2) Identify key issues in developing database systems and applications (3) Explain the general organization of a relational database and explain the functions of the basic relational operators (4) Use query languages, in particular, Structured Query Language (SQL), to define, maintain, and query relational databases (5) Model a relational database through entity-relationship (ER) modeling and construct ER diagrams (6) Explain the methodologies used to conceptualize and design database systems (7) Apply decomposition and analyze/construct functional dependencies (8) Demonstrate an understanding of the concepts of relation normalization and the supporting fundamental knowledge of efficient database implementation
ENGL 6: Creative Writing Common Time	1 Credits/Maximum of 4	Topics include: conceptual data modeling, relational data model, relational query languages, schema normalization, database/Internet applications, and database system issues.
ENGL 15: Rhetoric and Composition	3 Credits	Data transmission, basic signaling, data encoding, error control, communication protocols, security, network topologies, routing, switching, internetworking, emerging high speed networks.  CMPSC 436CMPSC 436 Communications and Networking (3)This course introduces the elements and architecture of computer and data communication networks, demonstrates the fundamental principles of computer networking, and provides experience in the practical use of current networking technology. Topics in this course include: data communications (basic signaling, data transmission, data encoding, errors and error control), communications architecture and protocols (communication protocols, internetworking, transport protocols, layered network architecture, network security) and computer networks (WANs, LANs, network topologies, internetworking, routing and switching strategies and emerging high speed networks).After taking 
ENGL 15A: Rhetoric and Composition	3 Credits	, students should be able to:1) understand the fundamentals of networking concepts and terminology2) define and contrast the classifications local area network (LAN), metropolitan area network (MAN), and wide area network (WAN)3) name and describe basic networking elements4) define the roles of clients, servers, and peers as they relate to computer networks5) define the term "protocol" and explain how it relates to computer networks6) identify specific network management areas and describe the organizational issues relating to each of themStudents will be evaluated on homework (35% of grade), semester exams (35%), and a final comprehensive exam (30%).This course is an elective in the computer science (COMP) BS curriculum. This course is intended to be taken by second semester juniors or seniors.No special facilities are required for this course. This course will be offered once per year, with an expected enrollment of 60.
ENGL 15E: Rhetoric and Composition Enhanced	3 Credits	Network architectures, communication protocols, internetworking, network security, client-server computing, web application development, programming with APIs.  
ENGL 15S: Rhetoric and Composition	3 Credits	 Machine Learning and Algorithmic AI (3) Machine learning and artificial intelligence are closely-related branches of computer science that deal with the development of software that can "learn" how to perform useful tasks from prior data. Machine learning is mostly concerned with inferring trends from data in order to use them for future predictions. Artificial intelligence is mostly concerned about how to use knowledge gained from previous data to achieve specific goals.This course provides an introduction to important concepts in machine learning and artificial intelligence, as well as probabilistic and mathematical tools needed for applications of technology from both fields. Students will learn about important models and algorithmic frameworks used in machine learning such as linear models, neural networks, decision trees, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbor, adaboost, k-means clustering, and agglomerative clustering as well as methods for evaluating and tuning these models. Students will also learn about key artificial intelligence concepts such as A* search and reinforcement learning which are used by software agents (such as game AI's) to navigate and explore their environment.
ENGL 30: Honors Freshman Composition	3 Credits	Today's security event monitoring and correlation tools are being taxed more than ever before. The constant deluge of data being output by the many devices in our security infrastructures and input into log managers, SIEM (Security information and event management) and other security management interfaces creates quite a load on our analytics systems. In the noise of all this security and event-related data, it is difficult to sort through and obtain real, actionable events that need attention. The market is in need of a new generation of security tools - ones that process much larger datasets, are capable of deep-dive analytics and rely more on intelligence than attack signatures. The proposed course will cover the fundamental data science techniques that are applied to enhance security intelligence. This course will complement the existing computer science and software engineering curriculum. It also prepares students for both a career as a data scientist and as a cybersecurity analyst.
ENGL 30S: Honors Freshman Composition	3 Credits	Problem solving, search techniques including local search and genetic algorithms, knowledge representation, planning, learning, and neural networks.  
ENGL 30T: Honors Freshman Composition	3 Credits	 Artificial Intelligence (3) The primary goals of this course are (1) to provide the students with an introduction to Artificial Intelligence concentrating on some fundamental areas of AI, and (2) to provide the students with a working knowledge of LISP so that they can investigate some basic problems in AI using LISP as a vehicle language.
ENGL 50: Introduction to Creative Writing	3 Credits	This course provides an overview of the foundations, problems, approaches, implementation, and applications of, artificial intelligence. Topics covered include problem solving, goal-based and adversarial search, logical, probabilistic, and decision theoretic knowledge representation and inference, decision making, and learning. Through programming assignments that sample these topics, students acquire an understanding of what it means to build rational agents of different sorts as well as applications of AI techniques in language processing, planning, vision.
ENGL 50H: Introduction to Creative Writing	3 Credits	Introduction to theory and practice of computer security with an emphasis on Internet and operating system applications.
ENGL 83S: First-Year Seminar in English	3 Credits	Secure software design principles/practices, common threats, applied cryptography, trust management, input validation, OS-/programming language- specific issues, software validation. 
ENGL 88: Australian/New Zealand Cultural Perspectives	3 Credits	 Secure Programming (3) This course presents an overview of the principles and practices of secure software design. The course begins with a presentation of overarching principles of secure software development that enable the design, implementation, and testing of secure systems that can withstand attacks. These principles and strategies for realizing them will be illustrated through an analysis of common security issues and pitfalls in the software development process. The course will cover a variety of programming languages including C/C++, Java, and scripting languages; different classes of systems including standalone applications, client/server systems, and peer-to-peer applications; and development issues specific to different operating systems. Students will develop and analyze programs that demonstrate security principles, strategies, coding techniques, and the use of tools that can help make code more resistant to attacks.
ENGL 97: Special Topics	3 Credits	Applied machine learning techniques are used in many different areas, such as the classification, visualization and analysis of data, clustering, and understanding of natural languages for human-computer interactions. These applications are crossing the boundaries of computer science and data science. Big technology firms have all started offering their own cloud machine learning platforms. This course will start with an overview of supervised and unsupervised learning, and introduce the associated libraries. It covers basic machine learning concepts, tasks, and workflow using an example classification problem based on K-nearest neighbors, Nave Bayes, Support Vector Machine (SVM), K-means, and implementation using Python libraries. Natural language processing (NLP) techniques including n-gram models, grammar, parse trees, and part-of-speech tagging will be discussed. The issue of dimensionality of data will be discussed, and the task of clustering data, as well as supervised approaches for creating predictive models will be described, and learners will be able to apply Python predictive modeling methods while understanding process issues related to data generalizability (e.g. cross validation, overfitting). The course will also look at more advanced techniques, such as neural network, feed-forward network, back-propagation and deep learning with cloud AI services. Technological differences between using cloud services at a higher level of abstraction and coding locally will be discussed. Students will be able to identify the difference between a supervised (classification) and unsupervised (clustering) technique, identify which technique they need to apply for a particular dataset, manage and understand data, and engineer features to meet that need. Students will work in teams to develop web applications that use industry standard cloud services provided by one of the AI cloud service providers.
ENGL 98: Special Topics	3 Credits	This course explores the fundamental concepts and engineering processes of software development and testing to produce software that is designed for security. This course is intended as a senior-level course for computational majors such as computer science and computer engineering since it covers the exploitation of programs based on computer architecture, systems, and software concepts. First, software engineering considerations associated with a variety of software vulnerabilities will be analyzed, along with defensive programming techniques to avoid such vulnerabilities. The next part of this course will introduce systematic software engineering principles for building secure software to defend its attack surface, such as reference monitors, privilege separation, information flow, and program verification. The third part will focus on methods for security testing of software including fuzz testing, symbolic execution, grey-box testing, and forensics. The final week of the course will examine adding security into the software engineering life cycle. The design and implementation of techniques to develop reference monitors, information-flow secure programs, testing mechanisms and enhancements, as well as defensive programming against prominent software vulnerabilities will be studied and analyzed. Upon completion of the course students will be able to critically analyze the design and implementation of software for security flaws and build security mechanisms to prevent exploitation of such flaws.
ENGL 100: English Language Analysis	3 Credits	Evaluation and use of machine learning models; algorithmic elements of artificial intelligence.
ENGL 103: The Great Traditions in American Literature	3 Credits	Problems of synchronization, concurrent execution, and their solution techniques. Design and implementation of concurrent software in a distributed system.
ENGL 104: The Bible as Literature	3 Credits	ALGORITHMS FOR INTERPOLATION, APPROXIMATION, INTEGRATION, NONLINEAR EQUATIONS, LINEAR SYSTEMS, FAST FOURIER TRANSFORM, AND DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS EMPHASIZING COMPUTATIONAL PROPERTIES AND IMPLEMENTATION.  STUDENTS MAY TAKE ONLY ONE COURSE FOR CREDIT FROM MATH 451 AND 455.
ENGL 105: American Popular Culture and Folklife	3 Credits	Floating point computation, numerical rootfinding, interpolation, numerical quadrature, direct methods for linear systems.  Students may take only one course for credit from 
ENGL 106: The Lynd Ward Graphic Novel Prize	3 Credits	 and 
ENGL 110: Newswriting Practicum	3 Credits	.
ENGL 111: The Possibilities of English	3 Credits	Polynomial and piecewise polynomial approximation, matrix least squares problems, numerical solution of eigenvalue problems, numerical solution of ordinary differential equations.
ENGL 112: Pennsylvania Literature	3 Credits	Graphics systems/hardware, color models, transformations, projections, clipping, hidden line/surface removal, aliasing, parametric curves/surfaces, 3D modeling animation.  CMPSC 457CMPSC 457 Computer Graphics Algorithms I (3)Concepts and techniques needed to draw geometrical objects with a discrete device: Coordinate systems, clipping, curves and regions, geometric transformations, parallel and projective projections, hidden line and surface removal, animation.
ENGL 115N: Arts of Love	3 Credits	Fundamentals of computer graphics:  input/output devices, transformation, projection, clipping, hidden line/surface elimination.
ENGL 128N: The Holocaust in Film and Literature	3 Credits	Visualization techniques for data analysis and presentation. Applying visualization and perceptual theory.  Using extending platform independent visualization software.  CMPSC 459CMPSC 459 Scientific Visualization (3)Visualization of scientific data and processes has always been important for gaining insights into scientific phenomena. Historically, such visualization has taken place in the scientist's imagination and was then rendered in drawings, graphs and diagrams. The rapid advance of computer technology, and in particular, computer graphics, has made new tools available to the scientist to aid in the interpretation and communication of scientific information. In this course students will study a variety of computer graphics, scientific visualization, and virtual reality techniques and apply them to scientific visualization projects. The projects will be drawn from all of the sciences and the resulting projects will then be available to faculty and students to use as tools in their disciplines.The prerequisites for this course are 
ENGL 129: Shakespeare	3 Credits	. Students will apply the writing skills gained in 
ENGL 129H: Shakespeare	3 Credits	 and refine them in the context of scientific writing. They will also have the opportunity to apply the knowledge and skills gained in CMPBD 360 and its predecessors, CSE 103 and CSE 120 within the context of a significant natural science or mathematical visualization problem. Software and languages used in this course will change as the discipline of scientific visualization evolves. Currently, programming will be done in C++ and Java; VRML and other virtual reality languages, and scientific specialty languages such as IDL, muPad, xpp, Mathematica, Maple, etc. Projects initiated in this course can form the basis for further development as a 494 research project.The course will take advantage of a variety of computing platforms available at Behrend including Windows NT and Unix.
ENGL 130: Reading Popular Texts	3 Credits	Design and implementation of high level programming languages and survey of language paradigms including imperative, functional, and object-oriented programming.  
ENGL 132: Jewish American Literature	3 Credits	 Principles of Programming Languages (3) The primary topics of this course include run-time systems for imperative programming languages and aspects of the object-oriented, functional and declarative paradigms that have applications in industrial software development. Study of these topics should improve student skills in programming, debugging and problem solving.
ENGL 133: Modern American Literature to World War II	3 Credits	Fundamental concepts of programming language design, specifications, and implementation; programming language paradigms and features; program verification.
ENGL 134: American Comedy	3 Credits	In-depth theoretical study of data structures such as balanced trees, hash tables, priority queues, B-trees, binomial heaps, and Fibonacci heaps.  
ENGL 135: Alternative Voices in American Literature	3 Credits	 Data Structures (3) The primary goals of this course are (1) to provide the students with a set of basic data structures useful in the design of efficient algorithms, and (2) to provide the students with the ability to design and analyze new data structures as needed to solve problems. The secondary goal of this course is to introduce basic algorithm analysis techniques to prepare the students for the follow up course 
ENGL 135S: Alternative Voices in American Literature	3 Credits	, Design and Analysis of Algorithms. This is a required course in the BS COMP program. It is also a prerequisite for a number of other courses in the COMP program such 
ENGL 136: The Graphic Novel	3 Credits	, 
ENGL 137H: Rhetoric and Civic Life I	3 Credits	, 
ENGL 138T: Rhetoric and Civic Life II	3 Credits	, etc.
ENGL 139: African American Literature	3 Credits	Recurrences, algorithms design techniques, searching, sorting, selection, graph algorithms, NP-completeness, approximation algorithms, local optimization algorithms.  
ENGL 139S: Black American Literature	3 Credits	 Design and Analysis of Algorithms (3) The primary goals of this course are (1) to provide the students with fundamental techniques for designing and analyzing algorithms, and (2) to introduce some techniques for dealing with inherently intractable problems.This is a required course in the BS COMP program.
ENGL 140: Contemporary Literature	3 Credits	Computability/Complexity: finite automata, regular & context-free languages, Turing machines, Church-Turing Thesis, undecidability, reducibility, completeness, time/space complexity, P versus NP.  
ENGL 140H: Contemporary Literature - Honors	3 Credits	 Introduction to the Theory and Computation (3)
ENGL 141N: African American Read-In Engaged Learning Experience	3 Credits	 introduces students to an essential part of theoretical computer science: how to define abstract mathematical models of computational devices (automata), how to characterize their computational power by studying the family of languages that they can recognize (formal languages), and what the limitations of even the most powerful computational devices are (computability). The course studies regular languages by means of deterministic and nondeterministic finite-state automata and regular expressions; it studies context-free languages through the use of context-free grammars and pushdown automata; and it studies computability by means of Turing machines and recursive and recursively-enumerable languages. The unsolvability of the halting problem for Turing machines is proved by a diagonalization argument, and this result is then used to show that various problems about languages are unsolvable, such as the problem of determining whether two context-free grammars generate the same language. Finally, the concept of computational complexity is introduced, and the classes P and NP are defined. (Informally, the former class consists of problems that can be solved computationally in a manageable amount of time, and the latter consists of problems for which a proposed solution can be verified in a manageable amount of time.) The concept of an NP-complete problem is defined, and some specific problems are proved to be values to the variable of a Boolean formula that will make the formula true).
ENGL 142N: Science in Literature	3 Credits	Fundamental concepts of computer science: data structures, analysis of algorithms, recursion, trees, sets, graphs, sorting.
ENGL 145: Modern Irish Literature	3 Credits	Prime sieves, factoring, computer numeration systems, congruences, multiplicative functions, primitive roots, cryptography, quadratic residues. Students who have passed 
ENGL 161N: The Pursuit of Happiness in American Life: Historical Literature and Modern Practice	3 Credits	 may not schedule this course.
ENGL 162N: Communicating Care	3 Credits	Regular, context free, recursive, and recursively enumerable languages; associated machine models; applications.  
ENGL 163N: Defining the Animal	3 Credits	 Formal Languages with Applications (3) The primary goal of this course is to explore formal language theory, including regular, context free and recursively enumerable languages. Notations for specifying these languages (regular expressions, finite automata, context free grammars and turing machines) are emphasized. Applications of these languages, including pattern recognition, scanning, parsing, specification of programming language syntax and Unix shell programming, are also discussed. Study of these topics should provide a solid theoretical basis for students to draw on in studying diverse areas such as algorithm analysis, complexity theory and compiler construction.
ENGL 165N: Work and Literature	3 Credits	Compiler design and implementation; scanning, parsing, semantic analysis, optimization (including static analysis), code generation, garbage collection, and error detection.  
ENGL 170N: Introduction to American Folklore	3 Credits	 Compiler Construction (3) The primary topics of this course are areas of compiler construction that are applicable both in building compilers and in many other areas of computer science. Both the concepts and the implementation of these techniques will be emphasized. Study of these topics should improve student skills in programming, debugging and software engineering.This course is an elective for students in both the BS COMP and MS COMP programs. The course builds on concepts learned in earlier programming, data structure and computer organization courses.
ENGL 179: Exploring the Literature of Food: Current Trends in American Food Writing  and Environmentalism	3 Credits	Design and implementation of compilers; lexical analysis, parsing, semantic actions, optimization, and code generation.
ENGL 180: Literature and the Natural World	3 Credits	Theoretical and practical issues of operating systems design and implementation, process management, concurrent programming, memory management, scheduling, I/O, and security.  CMPSC 472CMPSC 472 Operating Systems Concepts (3)A course on operating systems is an essential part of a computer science education. This course is intended as an introduction to study the concepts, structure and mechanisms that underlie operating systems. A tremendous range and variety of computer systems exist for which operating systems are designed. Rather than focus on individual operating systems, this course discusses the key mechanisms of modern operating systems, the types of design trade-offs and decisions involved in operating system design and the context within which the operating system functions.After completing 
ENGL 181A: Adventure Literature: Exploring the Chesapeake Bay	3 Credits	 the student should be able to:(1) describe and understand the four major components of an operating system: process management (including synchronization, scheduling, mutual exclusion, deadlocks and concurrency), input/output (including disk scheduling and disk 1/0), memory management (including virtual memory, paging, segmentation and addressing) and management of the file systems(2) describe and understand how a centralized operating system functions(3) describe and understand the various components of an operating system(4) describe the various goals of protection and the security problem in general(5) compare centralized operating systems with distributed operating systemsStudents will be evaluated on homework (35% of grade), semester exams (35%), and a final comprehensive exam (30%).This course is required in the computer science (COMP) BS curriculum. It is intended for seniors to take this course in their fall semester. This course is also an admission requirement for the (COMP) MS program.No special facilities are required for this course. The software necessary is available in the computer labs or for students to use at home. This course will be offered once per year, with an expected enrollment of 80.
ENGL 181B: Adventure Literature: Exploring Cape Cod	3 Credits	Design and implementation of computer operating systems; management of various system resources:  processes, memory, processors, files, input/output devices.
ENGL 181C: The Beach: Exploring the Literature of the Atlantic Shore	3 Credits	Operating Systems overview and principles; processes and signals; concurrency and synchronization; memory and file management; client-server computing; scripts; systems-programming.
ENGL 181D: Adventure Literature: Exploring the Literature of American Wilderness	3 Credits	Development of software for devices including smart phones, tablets, handheld units, and other general purpose computing platforms.
ENGL 182: Literature and Empire	3 Credits	Applications of scientific knowledge and methods in the design and construction of computer software using engineering concepts.
ENGL 182A: Literature and Empire	3 Credits	Computer science capstone project with documentation emphasis.  
ENGL 182C: Literature and Empire	3 Credits	 
ENGL 183N: The Cold War in Literature, Politics, and History	3 Credits	 Computer Science Senior Project I (2) This course is phase one preparation for completing a design for a project to serve as the capstone to the computer science degree program. The course provides instruction and specification of a simulated real-world work environment and associated activities to employ and integrate computer science concepts. Technical instruction and delivered products will be required.Students enrolled in the program will: 1) produce a design for a significant senior project using a cooperative, team approach, 2) present concepts, progress, and products to and interact with peer and faculty review boards. The course will: 1) provide the student with an opportunity to work in a team environment designed around sound development practice, 2) present to students current team organization and management techniques, 3) describe various forms of written communication targeted to different audiences, and 4) reinforce the technical knowledge attained through the computer science curriculum.
ENGL 183Z: Adventure Literature	3 Credits	Computer science capstone project with documentation emphasis.
ENGL 184: The Short Story	3 Credits	Software development process, life cycle; requirements analysis, specification, design, prototyping, testing, project management, and documentation.  
ENGL 185: World Novel	3 Credits	 Software Engineering and Design (3) The primary goal of this course is to familiarize students with the wide variety of techniques and methodologies used in software engineering to assist in the development of large software systems. Issues discussed include the human factors involved in developing software, models of the software development process, the use of formal methods in software engineering, software validation and verification, and software maintenance.A second goal is to help students understand the importance of written communication in software engineering, and to provide opportunities for students to improve the quality of their writing - specifically in describing software systems. The primary means of accomplishing this goal is a semester long project in which students write requirements for a large software system. In writing these requirements, students describe the system for non-technical readers (clients and users) and specify it for technical readers (other system developers).A final goal is to emphasize the role of teams in software development. Modern software systems are simply too large to reasonably be produced by one person, so the ability to work as part of a team is vital. To support achieving this goal, techniques and tools for working in groups are discussed in the course, and students work on the semester project in teams.This course is a required course in the computer science (COMP) BS curriculum, and is intended to be taken by seniors as the capstone course for the major. As such, the course integrates material from many (potentially all) of the undergraduate computer science courses. This course is also available as an elective for students in the MS COMP program.
ENGL 189: Modern Drama	3 Credits	Project design and implementation with an emphasis on team work, documentation, and the employment and integration of computer science concepts.  
ENGL 190Q: Medievalism	3 Credits	 Computer Science Project (3) This class provides a hands-on experience designing and developing a real-world software system. The course will emphasize collaboration and teamwork to employ and integrate computer science concepts. Students will work on a project that will serve as the capstone to the computer science degree program. Technical instruction, research, software implementation and delivered products will be required.
ENGL 191: Science Fiction	3 Credits	Supervised Honors thesis research in computer science and engineering.
ENGL 192: The Literature of Fantasy	3 Credits	Supervised off-campus, nongroup instruction including field experience, practica, or internships.  Written and oral critique of activity required.
ENGL 193N: The Craft of Comics	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, which are supervised on an individual basis and which fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ENGL 194: Women Writers	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
ENGL 194S: Women Writers	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ENGL 197: Special Topics	3 Credits	
ENGL 197K: Special Topics - InterDomain	3 Credits	 Principles of Economics (3)(GS)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Economics is the study of how people satisfy their wants in the face of limited resources. Economics is a consistent set of methods and tools that is valuable in analyzing certain types of problems related to decision-making, resource allocation, and the production and distribution of goods and services. There are two main branches of economics, microeconomics, and macroeconomics. Microeconomics deals with the behavior of individual households and firms and how that behavior is influenced by government. Macroeconomics is concerned with economy-wide factors such as inflation, unemployment, and overall economic growth. 
ENGL 198: Special Topics	3 Credits	 is a survey course that covers introductory topics from both microeconomic and macroeconomics. The course is designed as a general education course in basic economics for non-majors. An important goal of this course is to take each student as far down the road of "thinking like an economist" as possible. The course begins by studying microeconomic topics, including supply and demand, elasticity, and market efficiency. The course then switches course to macroeconomics topics, including GDP, income, growth, inflation, unemployment, fiscal policy, and monetary policy. A variety of mechanisms is used to assess student performance. These evaluation methods typically include exams, quizzes, and homework assignments. Students who have passed 
ENGL 199: Foreign Study--English	3 Credits	 or 
ENGL 200: Introduction to Critical Reading	3 Credits	 or who are registered in the College of Business Administration may not schedule this course.
ENGL 200H: Introduction to Critical Reading	3 Credits	Methods of economic analysis and their use; price determination; theory of the firm and distribution. 
ENGL 200W: Introduction to Critical Reading	2 Credits	 Introductory Microeconomic Analysis and Policy (3)(GS)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Economics is the study of how people satisfy their wants in the face of limited resources. One way to think about economics is that it is a consistent set of methods and tools that is valuable in analyzing certain types of problems related to decision--making, resource allocation, and the production and distribution of goods and services. There are two main branches of economics, microeconomics, and macroeconomics. Macroeconomics is concerned with economy--wide factors such as inflation, unemployment, and overall economic growth. Microeconomics deals with the behavior of individual households and firms and how government influences that behavior; it is the subject of this course. More specifically, 
ENGL 201: What is Literature	2 Credits	 is an introduction to microeconomic analysis and policy. The principal objective of the course is to enable students to analyze major microeconomic issues clearly and critically. Students will be introduced to the methods and tools of economic analysis, and these analytical tools will be applied to questions of current policy interest. Learning these methods and tools and applying them to interesting policy questions and issues is sometimes called "thinking like an economist." An important goal of this course is to take each student as far down the road of "thinking like an economist" as possible. A variety of mechanisms are used to assess student performance. These evaluation methods typically include exams, quizzes, homework assignments, and group projects. 
ENGL 201H: What is Literature	3 Credits	 is an introductory course in economics and as such, serves as a prerequisite for several microeconomics--oriented 300--level courses. It is also a required course for all majors and minors in economics, and meets requirements for a General Education (GS) or Bachelor of Arts social science course. Students who have completed 
ENGL 202A: Effective Writing: Writing in the Social Sciences	3 Credits	 may not enroll in this course.
ENGL 202B: Effective Writing: Writing in the Humanities	3 Credits	
ENGL 202C: Effective Writing: Technical Writing	3 Credits	 Introductory Microeconomic Analysis and Policy, Honors (3)(GS)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Economics is the study of how people satisfy their wants in the face of limited resources. One way to think about economics is that it is a consistent set of methods and tools that is valuable in analyzing certain types of problems related to decision--making, resource allocation, and the production and distribution of goods and services. There are two main branches of economics, microeconomics, and macroeconomics. Macroeconomics is concerned with economy--wide factors such as inflation, unemployment, and overall economic growth. Microeconomics deals with the behavior of individual households and firms and how government influences that behavior; it is the subject of this course. More specifically, 
ENGL 202D: Effective Writing: Business Writing	3 Credits	 is an introduction to microeconomic analysis and policy. The principal objective of the course is to enable students to analyze major microeconomic issues clearly and critically. Students will be introduced to the methods and tools of economic analysis, and these analytical tools will be applied to questions of current policy interest. Learning these methods and tools and applying them to interesting policy questions and issues is sometimes called "thinking like an economist." An important goal of this course is to take each student as far down the road of "thinking like an economist" as possible. A variety of mechanisms are used to assess student performance. These evaluation methods typically include exams, quizzes, and homework assignments. This course serves as a prerequisite for several microeconomics--oriented 300--level courses. This honors version of the course is designed to provide the opportunity to pursue this course at a more in-depth and mathematically rigorous level.
ENGL 205: Children's Literature	3 Credits	This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Economics is the study of how people satisfy their wants in the face of limited resources. One way to think about economics is that it is a consistent set of methods and tools that is valuable in analyzing certain types of problems related to decision-making, resource allocation, and the production and distribution of goods and services. There are two main branches of economics, microeconomics, and macroeconomics. Microeconomics deals with the behavior of individual households and firms and how that behavior is influenced by government. Macroeconomics is concerned with economy-wide factors such as inflation, unemployment, and overall economic growth; it is the subject of this course.More specifically, 
ENGL 208N: The Music of the Beatles and American Popular Culture	1-6 Credits/Maximum of 6	 is an introduction to macroeconomic analysis and policy. The principal objective of the course is to enable students to analyze major macroeconomic issues clearly and critically. Students will be introduced to the methods and tools of economic analysis, and these analytical tools will be applied to questions of current policy interest. Broadly, the course focuses on the determination of national income, on unemployment, inflation, and economic growth in the context of a global economy, and on how monetary and fiscal policy, in particular, influence the economy. Learning the methods and tools of economics and applying them to interesting policy questions and issues is sometimes called "thinking like an economist." An important goal of this course is to take each student as far down the road of "thinking like an economist" as possible. A variety of mechanisms is used to assess student performance. These evaluation methods typically include exams, quizzes, homework assignments, and group projects.
ENGL 209: Journal or Magazine Practicum	1-6 Credits/Maximum of 6	 is an introductory course in economics, and as such, serves as a prerequisite for 300-level courses in intermediate macroeconomic analysis, international economics, and money and banking. It is also a required course for all majors and minors in economics, and meets requirements for a General Education or Bachelor of Arts Social Science (GS) course. Students who have completed 
ENGL 210: The Process of Writing	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 may not enroll in this course.
ENGL 211: Introduction to Writing Studies	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	
ENGL 211W: Introduction to Writing Studies	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 Introductory Macroeconomic Analysis and Policy (3)(GS)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Economics is the study of how people satisfy their wants in the face of limited resources. One way to think about economics is that it is a consistent set of methods and tools that is valuable in analyzing certain types of problems related to decision-making, resource allocation, and the production and distribution of goods and services. There are two main branches of economics, microeconomics, and macroeconomics. Microeconomics deals with the behavior of individual households and firms and how that behavior is influenced by government. Macroeconomics is concerned with economy-wide factors such as inflation, unemployment, and overall economic growth; it is the subject of this course. More specifically, 
ENGL 212: Introduction to Fiction Writing	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 is an introduction to macroeconomic analysis and policy. The principal objective of the course is to enable students to analyze major macroeconomic issues clearly and critically. Students will be introduced to the methods and tools of economic analysis, and these analytical tools will be applied to questions of current policy interest. Broadly, the course focuses on the determination of national income, on unemployment, inflation, and economic growth in the context of a global economy, and on how monetary and fiscal policy, in particular, influence the economy. Learning the methods and tools of economics and applying them to interesting policy questions and issues is sometimes called "thinking like an economist." An important goal of this course is to take each student as far down the road of "thinking like an economist" as possible. A variety of mechanisms is used to assess student performance. These evaluation methods typically include exams, quizzes, and homework assignments. This course serves as a prerequisite for 300-level courses in intermediate macroeconomic analysis, international economics, and money and banking. This honors version of the course is designed to provide the opportunity to pursue this course at a more in-depth and mathematically rigorous level.
ENGL 213: Introduction to Poetry Writing	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Basic statistical concepts used in economics. Topics include probability distributions, expectations, estimation, hypothesis testing, correlation, and simple regression. Students who have completed 
ENGL 214: Introduction to Creative Nonfiction Writing	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 may not schedule this course.
ENGL 215: Introduction to Article Writing	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Statistical Foundations for Econometrics Honors (ECON106H) teaches basic statistical concepts used in economics, specifically in the area of econometrics. Econometrics is a field of economics where quantitative methods are used to study economic data. Topics studied in this course include probability distributions, expectations, estimation, hypothesis testing, correlation, and simple regression. Since probability and statistics is a mathematical subject, it is nearly impossible to study it without using mathematical tools such as sets and functions. Therefore, students are expected to be comfortable with, or at the minimum open to, using algebra and mathematical arguments. Some concepts from calculus (e.g. derivatives and integrals) are important to understand continuous probability distributions such as the famous normal distribution. Therefore, the course will spend some time reviewing important concepts and results from calculus as needed. Students will also learn and other probability distributions and density functions, and be able to apply them in practice. Students will use computer programs to model randomized experiments and run regressions on datasets for analysis. Interpreting the findings of the regressions are key to understanding what the data shows, and depending on the data, the results may also have important policy implications. ECON106 is a required course for all majors in economics. This honors version of the course is designed to provide the opportunity to pursue this course at a more in-depth and mathematically rigorous level. It is a natural preparation for taking an honors section of Econometrics (ECON306), which is an introductory course on econometrics. Students who have completed ECON306 may not schedule this course.
ENGL 221: British Literature to 1798	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
ENGL 221W: British Literature to 1798	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, which are supervised on an individual basis and which fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ENGL 222: British Literature from 1798	3 Credits	
ENGL 222W: British Literature from 1798	3 Credits	
ENGL 223N: Shakespeare: Page, Stage, and Screen	3 Credits	), and with extensive use of calculus, about supply and demand, consumer theory, the theory of the firm, market structure and market power, factor markets, and extensions to consider uncertainty, missing markets, and limited information. Students will develop their skills for analysis of microeconomic issues. The skills learned in this course are necessary for a student to succeed in advanced courses. As such, this course is a prerequisite for a large number of microeconomics-oriented courses at the 400 level. This honors version of intermediate microeconomics is designed to provide the opportunity for students with advanced knowledge to pursue this key course at a more rigorous and in-depth level.
ENGL 224N: Authors and Artists	3 Credits	
ENGL 225N: Sexuality and Modern Visual Culture	3 Credits	 (Intermediate Macroeconomics) (3) (GS) (BA). This course looks at the causes and consequences of business cycles. Students begin by examining key macroeconomic variables, including nominal and real interest rates, nominal and real GDP, unemployment rates, and potential economic growth. A two-period consumption model is also analyzed with the life cycle theory of consumption. Economic models are studied to analyze these topics, and macroeconomic goals for a society are discussed. After acquiring many analysis tools, the course discusses general equilibrium, where formal theories can model a variety of shocks that hit the macroeconomy and the corresponding reactions in a variety of markets. Related topics include the production function, marginal productivity of capital, firm investment, labor demand, labor supply, marginal product of labor, the supply side of the economy, and aggregate demand. After establishing a solid understanding of general equilibrium, students will examine the Federal Reserve, monetary policy, the market for reserves, open market operations, and quantitative easing. The course finishes with lessons comparing and contrasting classical economic theory vs. Keynesian economic theory. The strengths and weaknesses of each theory are considered relative to the business cycle data.
ENGL 226: Latina  and Latino Border Theories	3 Credits	
ENGL 227: Introduction to Queer Theory	3 Credits	 Intermediate Macroeconomic Analysis (Honors) (3) (GS) (BA) This course is the honors version of ECON304 and meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. There are two branches within the discipline of economics: microeconomics, focused on the behavior of individual economic actors (consumers, firms, and government) and macroeconomics, focused on economic aggregates (e.g., inflation, unemployment, aggregate economic growth). There are four core courses in economics that are required of all majors and minors: introductory and intermediate courses in microeconomics and macroeconomics. This course is the upper-level core course in macroeconomic analysis. Students will learn, at a deeper level than that covered in the beginning macroeconomics course (
ENGL 228: Introduction to Disability Studies in the Humanities	3 Credits	), and with extensive use of calculus, about the measurement and structure of the national economy, long-run economic performance and the factors that influence it, business cycles and macroeconomic policy, and the environment and institutions that are pertinent to macroeconomic policy. Students will develop their skills for analysis of macroeconomic issues and policy. The skills learned in this course are necessary for a student to succeed in advanced courses. As such, this course is a prerequisite for a large number of macroeconomics-oriented courses at the 400 level. This honors version of intermediate macroeconomics is designed to provide the opportunity for students with advanced knowledge to pursue this key course at a more rigorous and in-depth level.
ENGL 229: Digital Studies	3 Credits	The implementation of statistical techniques to analyze data and address economic questions.  Econometric results are produced and assessed.
ENGL 231: American Literature to 1865	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	The implementation of statistical techniques to analyze data and address economic questions.  Econometric results are produced and assessed.  
ENGL 231Y: American Literature to 1865	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 but with more mathematical rigor (i.e., using calculus). Following an introduction and reviews of probability and statistics, the course will focus on: (1) the statistical properties of commonly-used estimators and test statistics in regression models, (2) how to use them in practice for statistical inference, and (3) the issue of endogeneity and instrumental variables. Students will study both practical and theoretical aspects of econometrics, by which they will be able to implement the basic methods in practice and to understand the limitations of these methods. This course is an honors version of the second quantitative course in economics that is now required of all economics majors. As noted above, students will learn both theoretical and practical aspects of econometrics, so that they will be able to carry out econometric analyses of data. Evaluation of student performance will be based on homework assignments, midterm exams, and a final exam. Typically, the homework assignments would account for 20 percent of the overall course grade, each of two midterm exams would count for 25 percent of the grade, and the final exam would count for the remaining 30 percent of the grade. This course has 
ENGL 232: American Literature from 1865	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	, and ECON 483W, as well as other 400-level courses requiring econometrics.
ENGL 232Y: American Literature from 1865	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 (3 credits) (GS) (BA). This course is designed to develop the concepts and techniques of labor economic theory and its applications. Key questions to consider for the course include: Why do some people earn more than others? When would people choose to work or not? When would someone choose to further his or her education? Do earnings differences necessarily mean discrimination? To answer these questions, students will begin the course by learning the basics of the labor market, including labor demand and labor supply. Employment and earnings are then discussed, including the definition of unemployment, different types of unemployment, and reasons individuals would choose to work or not. Data is used to examine labor market trends and their implications. The course also explores human capital, wage determination, collective bargaining, wage differentials, discrimination, and related government policies. Considerable emphasis will be placed on problem solving and the application of labor economics to selected public policy issues and current economic events. Knowledge and understanding will be assessed through exams, homeworks, and a final project. This course is one of several 300-level electives which can used toward the Economics major and meets requirements for a General Education (GS) or Bachelor of Arts social science course.
ENGL 233N: Chemistry and Literature	3 Credits	, Public Finance (3) (GS) (BA). This course examines contemporary fiscal institutions in the United States, public expenditures, public revenues, and the incidence of major taxes such as the personal income tax, the corporate income tax, and consumption taxes. We also discuss intergovernmental fiscal relations in a federal system of government, and public debt (or deficit financing). We explore the economic rationale for, the current data, and status of the political debate on these topics and others as time permits. Some of the key topics discussed in the lectures include externalities and solutions to market failure associated with them, efficient provision of public goods, and cost-benefit analysis as a nonmarket way to allocate scarce resources. We also devote a substantial amount of time to the market for health care and the role of government in the provision of health care in the United States. In addition to governments role in health care, we spend a great deal of time on other major federal government spending programs including social security and a number of spending programs targeted at low income citizens. The later includes the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Here, students are expected to critically analyze the major effects of these programs on poverty as well as incentives to work. On the revenue side of public finances, we focus on both the redistributive and efficiency effects of taxation. We discuss the statutory and economic incidence of consumption taxes, the personal income tax, and the corporate income tax. The last part of the course includes two major topics  deficit financing and intergovernmental fiscal relations. In the deficit-financing chapter, we focus on the federal government debt. Students learn about the different measures of public debt, which include gross national debt, intergovernmental debt, and debt held by the public. Under intergovernmental fiscal relations, we discuss the delineation of spending responsibilities between the federal and state governments. We also discuss major funding sources for states and local governments in the United States.
ENGL 234: Sports, Ethics, and Literature	3 Credits	
ENGL 235: From Folk Shouts and Songs to Hip Hop Poetry	3 Credits	, International Economics (3 credits) (GS) (BA). This course applies the knowledge from Introductory of Microeconomics (
ENGL 236N: Inequality: Economics, Philosophy, Literature	3 Credits	) and Introductory of Macroeconomics (
ENGL 237N: Reading and Writing Documentary Poetry	3 Credits	) into International trade. Students will learn about why nations trade and the effects of trade on both consumer and producer. Some people will gain and some people will lose from trade and students will learn how to measure gain and loss from trade. This class also introduces trade barrier policies imposed by the government such as tariff, quota, subsidy and other commercial policy such as dumping and countervailing duty. The creation of the international organizations, such as the World Trade Organization (WTO) and General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) are discussed. Later in the course, the Macroeconomics side of the international trade is discussed as well as the Balance of Payments, which is a way to summarize and measure a countries trade with the rest of the world. Students will also examine some of the basics of the foreign exchange market and the relationship with the interest rates. Toward the end of the course, the lessons will cover the International monetary systems, which include the gold standard, Bretton Woods system, fixed exchange rates, and flexible exchange rates
ENGL 240: Exploring Literary Traditions	3 Credits	Industrial Organization (3 credits) (GS) (BA) Industrial Organization focuses on the study of markets with imperfect competition. After reviewing the Perfect Competition model, the assumptions of that model are systematically relaxed, allowing us to focus on market failures that result, and how they might be remedied. The Structure-Conduct-Performance paradigm is followed. The structure of an industry affects the behavior of firms in that industry, which in turn affects the performance of that industry, evaluated from an efficiency standpoint. Much current material is discussed, especially potential mergers in certain industries and how they might affect market outcomes. Attention is given to oligopolies, using game theory as a tool with which to analyze the performance of these types of markets. Pricing strategies, asymmetric information, advertising, and antitrust law are also covered. The course is designed to provide students with a theoretical background with which to understand current market structures and events. Empirical data is discussed to test the models and theories presented in class.
ENGL 245: Introduction to LGBTQ Studies	3 Credits	Money, credit, commercial and central banking, financial intermediaries, treasury operations, monetary policy. Students who have already taken 
ENGL 250: Peer Tutoring in Writing	3 Credits	 may not schedule this course.  
ENGL 261: Exploring Literary Forms	3 Credits	 Money and Banking (3)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. In this course, students learn all about the Federal Reserve and the conduct of monetary policy: both conventional and unconventional. Students will examine many different interest rates and learn how they are determined. Students will study the importance of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate and become familiar with business cycles in the US economy since 1970 and the associated Fed policy during these episodes. Term structures of interest rates are analyzed as well as the risk structure of interest rates. The Taylor Rule and various specifications of the Taylor Rule are applied to these topics. Students also study the efficient market theory and the determination of stock and bond prices. The course finishes by engaging students in the topics of futures, options, and futures options and hedging with futures and options.The objective of the course is help students get a better understanding of macroeconomic and monetary topics and policy. Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to contribute to any discussion about the U.S. economy and Federal Reserve policy, analyze real world events as they relate to U.S. monetary policy, and share their newly acquired human capital with others.The prerequisite for this course is ECON104. Students who have taken ECON451 cannot schedule ECON351.
ENGL 262: Reading Fiction	3 Credits	Supervised off-campus, nongroup instruction including field experiences, practica, or internships. Written and oral critique of activity required.
ENGL 263: Reading Poetry	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in-depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
ENGL 265: Reading Nonfiction	3 Credits	Courses offered in foreign countries by individual or group instruction.
ENGL 268: Reading Drama	3 Credits	Readings, discussion, and oral and written reports on selected topics in economics.
ENGL 281: Television Script Writing	3 Credits	Survey of economic ideas from Greco-Roman times to the present.
ENGL 282: TV Script Writing 2	3 Credits	Development and application of the tools for decision making under uncertainty and for game theoretic analysis of economic problems.
ENGL 294: Research Topics	3 Credits	An analytical survey of significant problems of current economic policy and the application of economic analysis to important social issues.
ENGL 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	Economic theory of the resolution of social conflicts: social choice theory, voting, noncooperative games, voluntary trade, and allocation by force.
ENGL 297: Special Topics	3 Credits	Applications of the tools of game theory to analyze topics in collective decision making.
ENGL 297E: Special Topics - InterDomain	3 Credits	Applications of the tools of game theory to analyze topics in collective decision making. 
ENGL 299: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	 Political Economy (3) The course covers two main topics. First, the course will analyze elections as a mechanism to aggregate preferences of the electorate. It will be shown that elections provide a good tool to strike a compromise between all members of the electorate if the scope of disagreement in the electorate is one-dimensional. A simple model of taxation in which citizens' preferences over tax rates are "one-dimensional" in the above sense will be developed. This model will be used to predict how tax rates in democratic countries change with the income distribution. It will be shown next that no satisfaction mechanism of preference aggregation exists in a slightly more general model of taxation. This result is a special case of the famous Impossibility Theorem by Arrow.Secondly, conditions will be given under which elections are a good mechanism to aggregate information that is spread throughout the electorate. It turns out that theories of information aggregation yield a convincing theory about abstention. A model in which the less informed voters delegate the decision to the more informed voters by simply abstaining will be discussed. The discussion of political debates and the media will be framed in terms of an information aggregation model. Finally, the potential of information aggregation theories to explain social movements will be discussed.Game theory provides a framework to think about many issues in the social sciences. This particular course focuses on some applications of game theory to politics. The first, and very specific goal, is to use the lens of game theory to understand the workings of various political institutions. The second, more general, goal is to enable students to apply game-theoretic reasoning to a wide range of topics in the social sciences. The third is to make the research frontier in the field of political economy as accessible as possible. It is hoped that students would get a better understanding of what graduate school would be like.This course has as its broad objective to expose students to the use of the tools of game theory to analyze collective decision making. Students will learn how to use economic theory to analyze real-world situations of collective decision making. They will develop their analytical skills as well as their skills in writing in economics.The writing-intensive course is one of a series of 400-level writing intensive seminars that the Economics Department is offering to its advanced undergraduates in seven different area of economics. This seminar is in the area of microeconomic theory.The course will count toward the major and the minor in economics as a 400-level course. Further, it will count toward completion of a module (specialization) in the area of theory and quantitative methods.
ENGL 301M: Honors Seminar in English: Pre-1800s literature	3 Credits	A comparative and cost-benefit analysis of intellectual property that examines patents, copyrights, governmental supported research, and prizes.
ENGL 310: Honors Thesis in English	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 Intellectual Property (3)We live in a society that has a decentralized system based on the institutions of private property and trade. In such a system, things belong to people and can be transferred by their owners to other people. An exchange that moves something to someone who values it more than its present owner produces a net benefit, which may be shared between the parties to the exchange. Thus such a system tends to move everything to those who most value it, producing an efficient allocation of goods and services. The logic and limitations of this process make up the branch of economics called price theory. The course undertakes an examination of intellectual property, a subfield of property rights. In the context of intellectual property, there are five specific areas of note: patent races, poorly constructed incentives, standards, licenses, and an examination of costs. There are three factors relevant to the costs of providing legal protection to some particular sort of intellectual property. One is how easy it is to define and defend property in that sort of idea. Another is the degree in which someone who creates and claims ownership in that particular sort of intellectual property reduces, by so doing, the options available to other people. The more serious these problems are, the less the gains from defining and enforcing property rights in ideas. Where they are sufficiently serious, we are better off with an intellectual commons--a legal regime in which certain classes of ideas are free for all to use than with intellectual property. These three costs must be balanced against the benefits--production of more and better intellectual property and better coordination of intellectual property once produced. The larger these benefits are likely to be, the greater the costs we are willing to bear in order to get them. The course objectives are to apply the framework of comparative and cost-benefit analysis to the study of intellectual property. The course will examine the empirical evidence, and also consider policy issues in this area.
ENGL 312: Globality and Literature	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Terrorism throughout history; economic causes, costs, sources, and consequences.
ENGL 312H: Globality and Literature	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Terrorism throughout history; economic causes, costs, sources, and consequences.  
ENGL 395: Internship	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 Economics of Terrorism (3)This microeconomics seminar examines the economics of terrorism. Beginning with a survey of terrorism through history and extending to terrorism in the 21st century, economic tools are deployed to better understand the causes and sources of terror. Terrorism imposes substantial economic costs, but there are also significant costs with policies to combat terrorism. A society is better off if the threat of terrorism can be reduced, or even eliminated, just as it is better off if the threat of crime can be reduced or eliminated. There are some economic roots of terrorism, but these have more to do with the incentives and constraints that individuals and organizations face than with any specific set of easily quantifiable factors that push people toward involvement in terrorist organizations. This suggest that policy responses to terrorism need to multi-faceted and flexible. Security policies, for example, need to be more cost effective, in order for both to achieve results and to limit the negative consequences of devoting excessive resources to security purposes. Similarly, aid policies need to concentrate on achievable objectives, both to obtain positive results and to provide a more representative and optimistic outlook on the future. Policies need to be targeted at filling in the voids left by weak states and shifting incentive structures within societies away from the use of violence.
ENGL 397: Special Topics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Economic analysis of the employment relationship from the microeconomic perspective, with emphasis on current labor-market problems and public policy issues.
ENGL 399: Foreign Study--English	3-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Topics in behavioral economics; selected games; evolutionary models of social behavior, herding, overconfidence.
ENGL 400: Authors, Texts, Contexts	3-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Topics in behavioral economics; selected games; evolutionary models of social behavior; culture and social behavior; herding; overconfidence.  
ENGL 401: Studies in Genre	3 Credits	 Behavioral Economics (3)Behavioral economics examines recent evidence from experiments that seems to violate the hypotheses of economic rationality in traditional microeconomic theory. The course considers, among others, the following three topics: (1) Altruism in human behavior, as demonstrated, for example, in public goods experiments where people typically contribute some positive amount, even with the individually optimal strategy being to contribute nothing. (2) The prevalence of co-operative behavior in societies, which seems essential to their functioning, but which is hard (but not impossible) to explain on the basis of the actions of purely self-interested individuals. (3) Fairness in distribution: for example, people do not try to extract everything that their partners or opponents can give even when they are in a position of power (as in being the proposer of a take-it-or-leave-it offer). Students play some well-known games with each other to generate examples of their own behavior in multi-person interaction contexts; the results of the games are analyzed to detect regularities in the observed behavior; and the class discusses possible explanations drawn from economics, evolutionary biology and psychology as to why people (specifically the students) played the way they did in these games. Overall, then, students will learn about various aspects of behavioral economics, including several games and evolutionary models of social behavior, and how these aspects square with conventional economic theory. Students will develop the skill of analyzing behavior from a behavioral economics perspective. This course is a 400-level seminar, part of the Economics Department's offerings, many of them writing-intensive, for our advanced students in each of seven broad areas of economics. This writing-intensive seminar is in the area of microeconomic theory. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 401W: Creative Writing Theory	3 Credits	Advanced topics in labor economics: theory, empirical evidence, and policy.  
ENGL 402: Literature and Society	3 Credits	 Labor Economics and Labor Markets: Theory, Evidence, and Policy(3)This course is an advanced course in labor economics. Its coverage of topics overlaps somewhat with the topics covered in 
ENGL 403: Literature and Culture	3 Credits	, but typically the treatment of the topics considered will be distinctly more rigorous for this 400-level course. The broad areas that will be focused on in the course include labor supply, investment in human capital, labor demand, wage determination, search and unemployment, and earnings inequality. The objective of this course is to introduce students to topics in labor economics with a rigorous and advanced analytical approach. For each topic, the course will consider the underlying theory, pertinent empirical evidence, and implications for public policy. The instructional and educational objectives are to provide students with a strong background in labor economics. This will allow them to take advanced seminar courses in the labor field. This course is an advanced introduction to labor economics, and as such has a prerequisite of either 
ENGL 404: Mapping Identity, Difference, and Place	3 Credits	 or 
ENGL 405: Taking Shakespeare From Page to Stage	3 Credits	. In turn, this course will serve as a gateway to advanced seminar courses in labor economics at the 400 level that the Economics Department is in the midst of creating. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 406M: Honors Course in English: General Topic in Recent Literature	3 Credits	This course is for those who are interested in the challenge posed by persistent world poverty. We will address many different poverty related issues and the goal is to examine how economists can contribute to shedding light on the problem of world poverty and providing insights into its alleviation. Among the questions that we will address are: How persistent is the extent of world poverty? Does rapid economic growth help the poor? Why do some countries grow fast and others fall further behind? What is economic life like when living under a dollar a day? How do we deal with the disease burden? Does providing meals in schools help students perform better? Is microfinance overrated? Has globalization hurt or help the poor? Does foreign aid help or hinder the economic prospects of poor countries?
ENGL 407: History of the English Language	3 Credits	Economic prosperity in historical perspective; recent successes (East Asia, China, India); ongoing challenges (the bottom billion; sub-Saharan Africa).  
ENGL 408M: Honors Seminar in English: General Topic in Post-1800 Literature	3 Credits	 The Challenge of World Poverty (3)This course will first consider economic growth and the spread of economic prosperity in historical perspective. Then contemporary success stories, including the East Asian miracle and growth in China and India, will be studied. The last part of the course focuses on the poor worldwide, and examines poverty traps in Africa, why aid doesn't work, and why globalization hasn't helped. Students are expected to learn about the barriers to reducing world poverty and proposals aimed at alleviating poverty. Students will also learn about the growth and diffusion of economic prosperity, with both historical and contemporary examples. Students will develop analytical skills as we4ll as writing skills. This course is one of a series of 400-level seminars, many of them writing-intensive, for our advanced students in each of seven broad areas of economics. This writing-intensive seminar is in the area of economic growth and development. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics. Students will read four books about world poverty, write short book summaries, and write a term paper focuses on one feasible solution to alleviating poverty in Africa. In addition, there will be a midterm exam and a final exam.
ENGL 409: Composition Theory and Practice for Teachers	3 Credits	Evidence on climate change; economic models of the environment and market failure; cost-benefit analysis of policy options; carbon markets.
ENGL 411M: Honors Seminar in English: Creative Writing	3 Credits	Evidence on climate change; economic models of the environment and market failure; cost-benefit analysis of policy options; carbon markets.  
ENGL 412: Advanced Fiction Writing	3 Credits	 The Economics of Global Climate Change (3)The first part of the course reviews the scientific evidence on global climate change (IPCC studies). This is followed by an analysis of market failure in the production of greenhouse gas emissions, and consideration of carbon markets as a policy response. A cost-benefit study of the control of greenhouse gases (the Stern Report) is examined, and the concluding part of the course looks at a computer model of economic activity and the environment. Students will learn about the scientific evidence on global climate change, and the associated economic implications, market failures, and policy options to mitigate those market failures. Students will develop skills to assess policy options in this area, and they will become conversant with applied cost-benefit analysis and a computer model of economic activity and the environment. This course is one in a series of 400-level seminars, many of them writing-intensive, for advanced economics students in each of seven broad areas of economics. This writing-intensive seminar is in the area of applied microeconomics. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 413: Advanced Poetry Writing	3 Credits	Uncertainty and Risk as related to finance, insurance, health, labor, industrial organization, and macroeconomics.
ENGL 414: Biographical Writing	3 Credits	Uncertainty is examined in contracts, with an emphasis on limited liability. Asymmetric information and economic puzzles are also considered.  
ENGL 415: Advanced Nonfiction Writing	3 Credits	 The Economics of Uncertainty (3)This course studies the allocation of resources under uncertainty. Decisions without perfect information require the use of probability theory and expected utility preferences. The seminal work of Arrow and Debreu is used as a starting point. Probability and utility theory are then used to interpret insurance contracts. Limited liability is introduced and the Modigliani-Miller Theorem is applied to loan guarantees, deposit insurance, and insurance claims. Finally, asymmetric information is discussed and the resulting problems of moral hazard and adverse selection are addressed. The course objectives are to introduce students to the theoretical framework used by economists to study uncertainty and to apply that framework in order to explain various regularities observed when decisions are made without complete information, to examine the empirical evidence, and to consider policy issues in this area. The course will count toward both the major and a minor in economics.
ENGL 416: Science Writing	3 Credits	There are many data sets but the information contained within them for economic analysis is often unclear without substantial investigation. The broad course objectives are 1) to familiarize students with the deficiencies of real-world data and 2) teach students how to address those deficiencies. Specific topics addressed include the reliability of data sources, the ambiguity in variable definitions, the miscoding of variables, and missing data. In addition, truncation and censoring from the data collection methodologies are examined. The econometric methods of linear regressions and instrumental variables are used to analyze the results of a model with and without the data errors. The results are studied to predict how the missing data can alter model outcomes and policy choices. Several economic data sets are examined to illustrate the concepts. Specific examples of datasets include microeconomic data such as industry growth and profits, elasticity and revenue estimates from pricing choices, output of homogenous goods such as gold and oil, consumer subscription rates to services such as cell phone and internet service and discount memberships, and the efficacy of new drugs in tests. Macroeconomic data topics include discussions regarding unemployment and job data forecasts and how this can relate to future monetary and fiscal policy. Other topics discussed include sample bias and low response rates to surveys, in which the numerical values of dataset itself were not manipulated, but gathered from samples which will give an inaccurate result. These issues can affect polling and predictions in elections. This course is an applied course in the field of econometrics and will seek to provide students with the analytical methods for understanding the economic content of data. The instructional and educational objectives are to expose students to the practical details of analyzing economic data in the context of an advanced seminar. The course will count toward both the major and minor in economics.
ENGL 417: The Editorial Process	3 Credits	This course provides a framework for the analysis of monetary history. The course objectives are to introduce students to the theoretical framework used by economists to study monetary theory, and to apply that framework in order to explain various monetary systems that have existed in the past. We will examine the empirical evidence, and also consider policy issues in this area. There is scope for re-examining existing analyses of many of those historical systems. Topics discussed in the course include the Federal Reserve control of the money stock, the demand for money, money as part of economic activity, economic indicators and monetary policy, the Lucas critique, interest rates and the frequency at which they are changed, the creation and purpose of central banking, and private banking regulations. Historical monetary events to be discussed include monetary policy before and during the Great Depression, monetary policy during the Great Recession of 2007 - 2009, the gold standard monetary system, the Bretton Woods system, and the termination of these standards. Among all topics, both current and historical, we will examine the incentives of individuals, firms, banks, borrowers, and lenders, and governments as responses to monetary policy changes. Finally, advances in monetary theory based on macroeconomic events, both national and global, will be analyzed. The course will count toward both the major and minor in economics.
ENGL 418: Advanced Technical Writing and Editing	3 Credits	Monetary history is examined.  Special attention is paid to commodity-based systems, private money, and government monopolies on currency.  
ENGL 419: Advanced Business Writing	3 Credits	 Applying Monetary Theory to Monetary History (3)This course provides a framework for the analysis of monetary history. In the past, there have been many advances in monetary theory. Some of the advances are directly inspired by the varieties of monetary systems that have existed in the past - for example, systems in which private banks issue currency (bank-notes). There is scope for reexamining existing analyses of many of those historical systems in the light of advances in monetary theory. The course objectives are to introduce students to the theoretical framework used by economists to study monetary theory, and to apply that framework in order to explain various monetary systems the have existed in the past. We will examine the empirical evidence, and also consider policy issues in this area.
ENGL 420: Writing for the Web	3 Credits	Inequality and poverty in the United States, measurement problems, determinants of inequality, arguments for and against equality, impact of redistributive policies.
ENGL 421: Advanced Expository Writing	3 Credits	Analytic and policy aspects of public expenditure decisions; applications from areas of contemporary public interest.
ENGL 422: Fiction Workshop	3 Credits	Energy economics studies topics related to the supply, energy markets, and environmental impacts of energy use.
ENGL 423: Poetry Writing Workshop	3 Credits	Environmental pollution, the market economy, and optimal resource allocation; alternative control procedures; levels of environmental protection and public policy.
ENGL 424: Creative Writing and the Natural World	3 Credits	Analysis of public revenue and expenditure structure primarily at the federal level; federalism; fiscal policy and public debt.
ENGL 425: Nonfiction Workshop	3 Credits	Analysis of personal and industrial location decisions, regional economic growth, migration patterns, and regional policy; emphasis on tools and techniques.
ENGL 426: Chicana and Chicano Cultural Production: Literature, Film, Music	3 Credits	Theories and methods for economic analysis of such urban problems as housing, segregation, government services, and transportation.
ENGL 427: Topics in Jewish American Literature	3 Credits	Causes/consequences of trade; effects of tariffs and quotas; strategic trade policy; political economy of trade restrictions and other topics.
ENGL 428: Asian American Literatures	3 Credits	Trade balance movements, exchange rate determination; monetary and fiscal policies in open economies; international policy coordination; the world monetary system.
ENGL 429: New Media and Literature	3 Credits	Analysis of the economic characteristics of women and minorities; with examination of race and sex discrimination and related government policies.
ENGL 430: The American Renaissance	3 Credits	Analysis of the economic characteristics of women and minorities, with examination of race and sex discrimination and related government policies.  
ENGL 431: Black American Writers	3 Credits	 Economics of Discrimination (3) (US) (BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements.This course constitutes an examination of the economics of discrimination. More precisely, the course will focus on economic theories of discrimination and on efforts by economists to measure the extent of labor market discrimination. An important objective of the course is thus to learn how economists conceptualize and study discrimination. This, in turn, requires that we examine how economists view and study economic differences by race, ethnicity, and gender (these are the types of discrimination that will be focused on in the course, although we will also consider other types of discrimination). Following the existing economic literature, much of our emphasis will be on labor market discrimination, but we will also consider discrimination in education and in housing. The first substantive section of the course outline below involves examination of data on the economic characteristics of women and blacks in relation to white males, considering both the current situation and recent trends. Data on Hispanics will also be presented. This work will be done by the students, working in groups. We will look at how mainstream economists conceptualize economic differences by gender and by race/ethnicity, respectively. Then we will focus on formal models of discrimination and empirical issues in attempting to measure discrimination, and we'll also examine an alternative approach to understanding economic inequality. The concluding section of the course will examine public policy issues related to discrimination. The course will count toward either a major or a minor in economics, and will meet the writing requirement for students in economics.
ENGL 432: The American Novel to 1900	3 Credits	Globalization entails many dimensions: trade, migration, FDI, offshoring, cross-border licensing of technologies.
ENGL 433: The American Novel: 1900-1945	3 Credits	 Multinationals and the Globalization of Production (3)This seminar examines the international economy and the effects of multinational activity on globalization. Some of the key questions that will be examined include: Is globalization really a new phenomenon? Is it irreversible? What are the effects on wages and inequality? What are the effects on production and innovation? These questions will be addressed through a careful reading of the historical timeline, an extensive analysis of capital flows, multinational enterprises and development. Students are expected to synthesize their findings into a final paper and present what they have learned to the class. The Economics Department seeks to provide students with a series of seminar courses in each of seven broad fields in the discipline; this is a course in the field of Trade.
ENGL 434: Topics in American Literature	3 Credits	The economic effects of globalization on individuals, governments, nation- states and business.  
ENGL 435: The American Short Story	3 Credits	 Winners and Losers from Globalization (3)This seminar explores the various effects of globalization on individuals in the United States and abroad. It integrates material from a variety of sub-disciplines in economics, including international trade, international finance, growth theory, labor economics, industrial organization, and political economy. Discussion of each core topic is model-based and informed by empirical evidence from the recent economic literature. The objectives of the course are to (1) deepen students' understanding of the basic forces at play as globalization takes place, and their implications for individuals' well-being; (2) sharpen students' ability to critically evaluate policy issues, both theoretically and empirically; and (3) develop students' ability to craft tightly reasoned economic reports. This course is an applied seminar in international economics. The impact of globalization is explored from a cost-benefit perspective. Winners and losers are identified using the tools and framework of economics. The instructional and educational objectives are to provide in-depth analysis of the consequences of globalization in the context of an advanced seminar. The course objectives are to analyze the winners and losers from globalization. This is a course in the field of international economics. The course will count toward both the major and minor in economics.
ENGL 436: American Fiction Since 1945	3 Credits	Application of economic theory to managerial decision making; risk, uncertainty; models and statistical techniques.
ENGL 437: The Poet in America	3 Credits	Coordination and incentive issues within a corporation. Topics include employment contracts, performance incentives and pricing of financial assets.
ENGL 438: American Drama	3 Credits	Economic analysis of U.S. health care system; planning, organization, and financing; current public policy issues and alternatives.
ENGL 439: American Nonfiction Prose	3 Credits	Economic analysis of U.S. health care system; planning, organization, and financing; current public policy issues and alternatives.  ECON (H P A) 445W Health Economics (3)The healthcare sector comprises a set of markets that differ in some significant ways from the textbook model. In the US, this sector performs well in some respects and questionably in others. Notably, there has been sustained improvement over time in life expectancy and other indicators of the effectiveness of health care for most people, but the resources devoted to producing this improvement have been growing considerable faster than GDP. The goal of this course is to examine several broad questions raised by these facts. The course begins with an overview of evidence on wealth, health expenditure, and life expectancy across countries, and then examines increasing life expectancy and medical expenditures in the US and their causes. Issues in measuring the value of medical expenditures are addressed, and an overview of the industrial organization of health care is provided. A major component of the course covers the economics of health insurance, and the course also examines medical R&D and the pharmaceutical industry as well as issues in the financing of medical care for the elderly. The course seeks to introduce students to the economic analysis of health care. It is in the area of applied microeconomics, and deals with issues relating to labor markets and public finance, in particular. This writing-intensive course will be one of several 400-level W seminars that the Economics Department is seeking to establish, with the broad objective of exposing our advanced undergraduate students to economic analysis in a seminar setting requiring significant writing by the students. The course counts toward the major and the minor in economics, as a 400-level course, In addition, it also counts toward a &quot;module&quot; (area of concentration) in human resource and public economics. Student performance in the course will be evaluated based on three papers.
ENGL 440: Studies in Shakespeare	3 Credits	Dynamics of industry evolution; empirical evidence and theoretical modeling of firm entry, growth, and exit; entrepreneurship; investment and strategic behavior.
ENGL 441: Chaucer	3 Credits	Dynamics of industry evolution; empirical evidence and theoretical modeling of firm entry, growth, and exit; entrepreneurship; investment and strategic behavior.  
ENGL 442: Medieval English Literature	3 Credits	 Economics of Industry Evolution (3)Industries are not static entities. They continually evolve as new products and production techniques are developed. In response to changes in demand and technology, new firms enter while existing firms grow, decline, and exit. This course studies the dynamics of industry evolution using both empirical tools and theoretical models of firm decisions to analyze the following broad questions: How does a new entrant establish a foothold in an industry? How does the entry process differ between industries built around new products versus industries for well-established products? What is the role of entrepreneurship and human capital? How do firms affect their growth and survival prospects by investing in R&D and other types of innovation? How does the life-cycle of high-tech industries differ from consumer products or capital-intensive manufacturing or services? The roles of antitrust policy and regulation in affecting firm turnover and industry evolution are also addressed. This course will seek to provide students with both theoretical and empirical methods to analyze the economic forces underlying the evolution of industries. Students will develop analytical and writing skills in the course. This course is one of a series of advanced, writing-intensive seminars in each of seven broad fields in economics; this is a course in the field of industrial organization. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 443: The English Renaissance	3 Credits	Topics in sports; demand, owners, ticket resale, leagues, markets, efficiency, antitrust, discrimination, collegiate sports.
ENGL 444: Shakespeare	3 Credits	Examination of economic issues pertaining to professional and collegiate sports, including analysis of industrial organization, labor markets, and local economies.  
ENGL 445: Shakespeare's Contemporaries	3 Credits	 Economics of Sports (3)Sports play a pervasive role in life in these United States, and this course examines a wide-ranging set of issues in considering the economics of sports. Students will learn about various aspects of sports in the United States, including the &quot;players&quot; (players, owners, fans), the institutional settings (sports leagues), and the effects of sports on the cities in which they are played. Students will develop the skills to analyze a wide variety of issues in sports economics. The course will touch on aspects of three distinct fields in economics: labor economics, industrial organization, and urban economics. This course proposal is one of a series of 400-level seminars, many of them writing-intensive, for advanced students in economics in each of seven broad areas of the discipline. This writing-intensive seminar is in the area of applied microeconomics. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 446: Milton	3 Credits	Theoretical and empirical analyses of auctions and procurements; different modeling environments; econometric analysis of auction and procurement data.
ENGL 447: The Restoration and the Eighteenth Century	3 Credits	Theoretical and empirical analyses of auctions and procurements; different modeling environments; econometric analysis of auction and procurement data.  
ENGL 448: The English Novel to Jane Austen	3 Credits	 Economics of Auctions and Procurements (3)This course provides the basic framework for theoretical and empirical analyses of auctions and procurements. The course begins with the foundations of game theory. Both complete and incomplete information models are emphasized. The main auction and procurement modeling environments are then covered. Included among these are the independent private value model, common value model, affiliated private value model, and basic forms of asymmetry. Several data sets are provided for discussion and analysis including FCC spectrum auction data, timber auction data, and road procurement data. Empirical models are proposed for the econometric analysis of the auction and procurement data. This course seeks to provide students with the analytical methods of both the theoretical and empirical analysis of auctions an procurements. Students should develop their analytical skills pertinent to the economics of auctions and procurements, and they will also develop their skills in writing in economics. This course is part of a series of advanced writing-intensive seminars in each of seven broad fields in economics. This is a course in the field of applied microeconomics. The course will count toward both the major and a minor in economics.
ENGL 449M: Honors Seminar in English: Pre-1800s literature	3 Credits	Collusion, Bidding Rings, Antitrust, Price Fixing, Incentives, Law
ENGL 450: The Romantics	3 Credits	 Economics of Collusion (3)Collusion by firms -- the explicit suppression of interfirm rivalry -- is profitable. However, it is often difficult to accomplish meaningfully. This course provides frameworks to analyze interfirm interactions, both theoretically and empirically. In addition, several case studies of cartel behavior in the U.S., Europe, and elsewhere are presented. Bidder behavior at auctions and procurements will also be examined to understand some of the underlying issues of collusion. Following an introductory section, the course examines first the law regarding collusion and then the history of collusion, focusing on notable cases in the U.S. and Europe. Economic models of collusion are then reviewed, along with the distinction between tacit and explicit collusion. The final substantive section of the course examines issues encountered in prosecuting collusion. The broad objective of the course is to use the tools of economics to analyze the interactions of firms in settings where collusion may occur. Educationally, then, the course seeks to expose students to the application of economic analysis in a context with major economic and legal implications. This is an advanced undergraduate course in the field of Industrial Organization (IO), and hence will add to our offerings in the IO field (our beginning IO course is 
ENGL 451: Literary Modernism in English	3 Credits	). Econometrics (ECON 490) is also a prerequisite because of the empirical analyses that will be an important component of the course. The course is one that may be used to satisfy requirements for the major and the minor in economics, as a 400-level course. It may also be used to complete a module (area of specialization) in the Economics of Business and Law. And it will serve as one of the Economics Department's writing-intensive 400-level seminars. Student performance will be evaluated via two midterm exams and a substantial term paper. The exams will each count for 15% of the overall course grade, and the term paper will count for the remaining 70% of the course grade.
ENGL 452: The Victorians	3 Credits	Monetary and income theory; monetary and fiscal policy.
ENGL 453: Victorian Novel	3 Credits	This course studies the economics of financial crises with special emphasis on 2008.
ENGL 454: Modern British and Irish Drama	3 Credits	Examination of causes and consequences of financial crises; asset pricing theory, market efficiency, speculative bubbles; policy considerations.  
ENGL 455: Topics in British Literature	3 Credits	 Financial Crises (3)This course focuses on the causes and consequences of financial crises. We study famous crashes from the South Sea Bubble to Long-Term Capital Management, as well as international financial crises such as the Asian Crisis of 1997-98 and the Argentine Crisis of 2001. We examine both the history of the crises and the economic factors that are the fundamental causes, in part with a view to determining if these crises were the inevitable outcome of speculative markets, or the result of regulatory error. The instructional and educational objectives of the course are to provide students with the opportunity to explore financial crises in a small, advanced seminar setting. The course objectives are to provide students with a theoretical framework for examining financial crises, to examine evidence on historical and more recent financial crises using that theoretical framework, and to consider policies aimed at avoiding and/or alleviating the effects of financial crises in light of the theoretical framework and the empirical evidence. The course is part of a curriculum overhaul of 400-level courses in economics, in which advanced seminar courses are being created in seven broad areas of economics. This seminar is in the area of macroeconomics. This course may be used to meet major or minor requirements.
ENGL 456: British Fiction, 1900-1945	3 Credits	It is not uncommon for two separate and distinct corporate entities within an industry to merge and become one firm. This course includes topics that examine the economics of mergers as well as economic policy with regard to mergers. There often are both pro-competitive and anti-competitive effects of mergers. In the U.S. the Federal Trade Commission has primary responsibility for assessing the balance between effects. Along with the FTC, the antitrust division of the department of justice can analyze potential mergers using economic data and forecasts with tools such as the HHI and four-firm concentration ratio. Legality of non-competitive markets and mergers is also analyzed using the Clayton and Sherman antitrust acts. Topics discussed related to pro-merger economic effects include reduction in the duplication of costly capital, economies of scale, reducing costs by cutting management, human resources, payroll, and other jobs not directly related to production of output. Further, some firms may contend that they are non-viable as a small business, but can survive as a larger competitor as the result of a merger. Finally, mergers may have positive implications for shareholders who effectively own the company. Negative effects of mergers topics are discussed, including a reduction in the number of competing firms, increase in market power, higher prices, reduction in consumer choice, and increased lobbying power of larger firms. This course examines unilateral effects and coordinated effects as identified in the horizontal merger guidelines. Vertical mergers are analyzed as well, where multiple parts of the production process of a final good come under the same ownership. Econometric issues associated with the measurement of unilateral and coordinated effects are discussed. The course concludes with ex-post merger reviews. This course is an applied microeconomics seminar in the field of industrial organization and will seek to provide students with the analytical methods of both the theoretical and empirical analysis of mergers. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 457: British Fiction Since 1945	3 Credits	Economics of the Internet; electronic commerce and network economics; pricing issues; intellectual property.  
ENGL 458: Twentieth-Century Poetry	3 Credits	Consumers, Firms, Utility Maximization, Profit Function, Equilibrium, Firm Distribution.
ENGL 460: Business and Literature	3 Credits	An advanced course in the economics of organizations.  The focus is on coordination, incentives, contracts, and information in corporations.  
ENGL 461: The Vernacular Roots of African American Literature	3 Credits	 Economics of Organizations (3)An advanced course in the economics of organizations. The focus is on coordination, incentives, contracts, and information in corporations. The goal of the course is to analyze coordination, incentives, contracts, and information in corporations. The formal tools used in the course will be drawn from game theory, contract theory, mechanism design, and information economics. All students are required to have taken Strategy prior to enrollment.
ENGL 462: Reading Black, Reading Feminist	3 Credits	Economic analysis of professional and collegiate sports: organization, input and output markets, the public sector, decision-making, and public policy.  
ENGL 463: African American Autobiography	3 Credits	 Issues in Sports Economics (3) This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to examine and understand the sports industry. The course integrates the perspectives of various economic areas (i.e., industrial organization, managerial economics, labor economics, public economics) with those of marketing, finance, and accounting into a single approach to industry analysis. It provides students with an appreciation for the unique realities of the professional and amateur sports enterprise. Case studies and assignments are developed so students can apply theoretical and statistical concepts to real sports activities and/or policies. Students have the opportunity to complete case analyses in teams, present their results and suggestions to the class, and respond to questions and critical reviews by their peers.
ENGL 464M: Honors Seminar in English: Multicultural	3 Credits	Microeconomics of demographic behavior; interrelationships between demographic and economic factors, in developing and industrialized economies; economic welfare and policy implications.
ENGL 466: African American Novel I	3 Credits	Econometrics, simultaneous equations, discrete choice, sample selection.
ENGL 467: African American Novel II	3 Credits	Random and fixed effects, endogeneity, balanced and unbalanced panels, censoring of spells, differences in differences, applications.
ENGL 468: African American Poetry	3 Credits	Random and fixed effects, endogeneity, balanced and unbalanced panels, censoring of spells, differences in differences, applications. 
ENGL 469: Slavery and the Literary Imagination	3 Credits	 Panel Data Models (3) Panel data sets, consisting of repeated interviews over time of a panel of individuals (in effect, a time series of cross-sectional data on the same individuals) offer multiple opportunities for sophisticated econometric analyses, while at the same time posing some unique problems. This course will cover advanced econometric techniques for dealing with panel data. Random- and fixed-effects models are addressed initially, followed by consideration of endogeneity, balanced and unbalanced panels, censoring of spells, and differences in differences. The concluding part of the course will focus on applications.The objective of the course is to provide students with exposure to models and techniques designed to deal with panel data (e.g., data on a set of individuals at various points in time), and to equip them with the skills to utilize those techniques in practical applications of data analysis.In particular, students will learn to exploit the panel nature of a data set to allow for individual-specific heterogeneity (e.g., random and fixed effects). They will learn how to address endogeneity problems, which can arise for various reasons including forward-looking behavior of individuals. Because data are often not available for the same set of (e.g.) individuals at all points in time, care must be taken to deal with such unbalanced panels, especially when such data are absent because of actions of the individuals.In addition, since this is a writing-intensive course, an additional objective is to provide students with the opportunity to develop their skills in writing in economics.This course is one of a series of 400-level seminars, many of them writing-intensive, for advanced students in each of seven broad areas of economics. This writing-intense seminar is in the area of econometrics. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 470: Rhetorical Theory and Practice	3 Credits	Economic analysis of why nations trade, barriers to trade, the international monetary system, and macroeconomic policy in an open economy.
ENGL 471: Rhetorical Traditions	3 Credits	Problems of capital formation, institutional considerations, theories of economic growth.
ENGL 472: Current Theories of Writing and Reading	3 Credits	Russia is the largest country on earth. It has had a major influence on world events, especially during the Soviet period. The Soviet period represents the greatest economic experiment ever undertaken. Russia has had a vast imperial experience, and its economy has proven capable of producing nuclear weapons and space exploration. Yet, its economy remains dependent on natural resources. Russia is a literary, nuclear and geopolitical superpower but not an economic superpower. This juxtaposition is unique. The aim of the course is to provide a review of Russian economic history together with main concepts explaining the peculiarities of economic and institutional development of the country. The course combines historical narrative with formal economic analyses. We will utilize both an economics and a history perspective. We will explore the development of the Russian economy in the Tsarist period, the abolition of serfdom and Russian industrialization before the Russian Revolution, and we will explore the economic history of the Soviet period. We will also explore the interaction of economic history with social history. The course will conclude by examining the myriad economic and social difficulties encountered in transitioning from a socialist to capitalist economy.
ENGL 473: Rhetorical Approaches to Discourse	3 Credits	experimental methods and experimental design and uses this framework to inform a careful examination of the strengths and limitations of economic theory in explaining actual human behavior in economic situations. When economic theories do not seem to fit the data the course draws on findings from other social sciences such as psychology and sociology to explore reasons for divergence of theory and practice. The content begins with a brief history of experiments in economics. Then it outlines key features of experimental design and an introduction to the basics of game theory, which are commonly utilized in experiments. After establishing the basics, the course investigates decision making under uncertainty and compares how various theoretical explanations predict actual human decisions. We then discuss bargaining experiments and bargaining theory. The course concludes with a description of common behavioral influences and biases in judgment and decision making. There is a common theme throughout the course showing how theory and experiments can be used in conjunction to improve of understanding of economic behavior.
ENGL 474: Issues in Rhetoric and Composition	3 Credits	Human Capital Approach to Migration; Economics of Family Migration; Evidence: Micro and Macro Perspectives; Migration Policies.
ENGL 475: Comics Studies	3 Credits	Human Capital Approach to Migration; Economics of Family Migration; Evidence: Micro and Macro Perspectives; Migration Policies.  
ENGL 477: Teaching Children's Literature	3 Credits	 Migration and Development (3)This course introduces students to migration in the developing world. What factors influence such migration, and how does migration affect economic development? The course provides a theoretical framework for examining migration (a human capital approach), and takes into consideration aspects specific to migration in the developing world, family considerations, and different types of migration. Immigration and remittances are also considered. The course examines empirical evidence on migration, and considers public policies that seek to influence migration and development. The course objectives are to provide students with a theoretical framework for examining human mobility and economic development, to examine evidence on migration using that theoretical framework, and to consider policies aimed at influencing migration and development in light of the theoretical framework and the empirical evidence. The integration of these three activities will develop student's skills in economic analysis and the writing aspect of the course will enhance their writing skills. This course is one os a series of writing-intensive seminars in seven broad areas of economics. This seminar is in the area of economic development, with relevance as well to labor economics. This course may be used to meet major or minor requirements.
ENGL 478: Grant Writing	3 Credits	In the system of economic development, labor markets emerge and evolve. While some elements of standard labor market analysis, such as the emphasis on demand for labor and supply of labor, remain most relevant here, there are also institutional aspects that are specific to developing countries. The course begins with a short review of the traditional labor market variables (labor force participation, employment and unemployment, earnings) before viewing specific topics relevant to developing countries. These topics include rural vs. urban labor markets and the factors that influence individuals in each setting, industry regulation by national and international law, efficiency wages in growing industries, worker safety, compensating wage differentials, and comparative advantage. Particular emphasis will be placed on the unique aspects that each of these issues may face in developing countries compared to developed countries. These unique issues include microloans, mercantilism, economic nationalism, the effects on conflict on economic growth, growth models exhibiting high marginal productivity of capital and technology, growth indicators, sector-specific growth, industrialization and deindustrialization, balanced growth theory (Ragnar Nurkse), foreign investment, trade barriers, tariffs, and exchange rates. The course is an advanced seminar in the broad area of development economics. The course objectives are to enable students to learn about labor markets in developing countries, how they are different from as well as similar to those in industrialized countries, and the problems and policy issues that pertain to these labor markets. Students will develop their analytical skills in this area. Students will study these topics and learn with theory and case studies why some countries become industrialized why others remain in developing status. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics.
ENGL 480: Communication Design for Writers	3 Credits	There are many resource allocations that are not unilateral decisions but instead require approval from two sides of the market. This course provides the theoretical constructs for the analysis of matching in market environments. Following a review of game theory, the course develops the theory of matching. The topic at large is introduced by the seminal paper in matching "College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage" by Gale and Shapley. Other peer-reviewed literature on the topic will be discussed. Topics that follow include economic applications in the areas of employment, marriage, college admissions, human organ donations, medical residents, and other current topics. Within each of these topics, analysis is performed to study the following questions: 1) What are the preferences and incentives of all of the market participants involved in the matching market? 2) What was the method in which matching occurred? 3) Is this end result Pareto efficient and stable? 4) If the result isn't Pareto efficient, could another method or algorithm be used to improve efficiency? 5) Does the efficient outcome yield equal (or near equal) gains to all market participants involved, or is there a large discrepancy in the utility of the participants post-matching? For example, in a marriage matching algorithm, do women end up much happier than men? In medical residencies, do hospitals end up with larger gains than the doctors? Within certain topics, specific models are also discussed, including the Beveridge curve, Cobb-Douglas matching functions, labor market frictions, Nash bargaining games, feasibility sets, disagreement points, egalitarian and non-egalitarian bargaining solutions, and risk aversion. This course is an applied economics course with relevance to the areas of microeconomics, macroeconomics, and labor economics. The course objective is for students to learn the analytical methods for understanding the economics of matching. Students will develop skills in applying matching models and analysis to practical situations. The course will count toward both the major and minor in economics.
ENGL 481: Literary Theory:  Historical Perspectives	3 Credits	Economic application of matching to employment, marriage, organ markets, and medical residents.  
ENGL 482: Contemporary Literary Theory and Practice	3 Credits	 Economics of Matching (3)There are many resource allocations that are not unilateral decisions but instead require approval from two sides of the market. Examples include employment and marriage. This course provides the theoretical constructs for the analysis of matching in market environments. Two applications of current interest - human organ allocations and medical resident employment - are given special attention. Following a review of game theory, the course develops the theory of matching. This is followed by economic applications, in the areas of employment, marriage, human organs, and medical residents. This course is an applied economics course with relevance to the areas of microeconomics, macroeconomics, and labor economics. The course objectives is for students to learn the analytical methods for understanding the economics of matching. Students will develop skills in applying matching models and analysis to practical situations. The course is one of a series of 400-level writing-intensive seminars in each of seven broad fields in economics; this is a course with relevance to microeconomics, macroeconomics, and labor economics. The course will count toward both the major and minor in economics.
ENGL 482W: Contemporary Literary and Cultural Theory	3 Credits	Mathematical techniques employed in economic analysis; formal development of economic relationships.
ENGL 483: Problems in Critical Theory and Practice	3 Credits	A survey of contemporary business forecasting techniques, with emphasis on smoothing, decomposition, and regression techniques.
ENGL 484: James Joyce	3 Credits	Forecasting time series, using linear regression models and econometric software; useful forecasting models; financial and seasonal time series; trends.  
ENGL 485: Australian and New Zealand Literature and Culture	3 Credits	 Economic Forecasting (3)This course is an applied econometrics course, and will seek to provide students with hands-on experience in forecasting. The goal of this course is to teach the students how to forecast time series, using econometric software, and what kinds of models are useful for that purpose. Topics to be covered include a review of regression analysis, with applications to forecasting; introduction to an econometric software package; introduction to time series regression analysis, with applications; the Box-Jenkins approach to time series modeling and forecasting; modeling and forecasting seasonal time series; deterministic and random trends, and how to distinguish them; and modeling and forecasting volatility of financial time series. The course will count toward both the major and the minor in economics. This course is one of a series of 400-level seminars in each of seven broad areas of economics; this is a seminar in econometrics.
ENGL 486: The World Novel in English	3 Credits	Applying statistical techniques to test and explain economic relationships; integration of economic theory with observed economic phenomena.
ENGL 487W: Senior Seminar	3 Credits	No description.
ENGL 488: Modern Continental Drama	3 Credits	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
ENGL 489: British Women Writers	3 Credits	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
ENGL 490: Women Writers and Their Worlds	3 Credits	Supervised student activities on research projects identified on an individual or small-group basis.
ENGL 491: The Capstone Course in Professional Writing	3 Credits	Supervised off-campus, nongroup instruction including field experiences, practica, or internships.  Written and oral critique of activity required.
ENGL 492: American Women Writers	3 Credits	Creative projects, including research and design, which are supervised on an individual basis and which fall outside the scope of formal courses.
ENGL 494: Senior Thesis in English	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
ENGL 494H: Senior Thesis in English	3 Credits	Study in selected countries of economic institutions and current economic problems.
ENGL 495: Internship	3 Credits	In 
ENGL 496: Independent Studies	3 Credits	 students will study a wide variety of genres of literature - poetry, novel, short story, drama, perhaps even genres like the comic book - from different time periods and cultures to gain a better understanding of how literature explores human values and issues. Throughout the course, students might use the texts to ask such questions as: of what value is a play, a novel, a poem, or a short story? Is literature worthwhile for its ability to tell a good story or for its questions that do not lend themselves to easy answers? Can literature improve our lives, individually and collectively? The course may also take advantage of literary events occurring on campus each semester - such as poetry readings, dramatic performances, even films relating to the course - to enrich the experience both of literature and of campus life.
ENGL 497: Special Topics	3 Credits	Major works of fiction, drama, and poetry from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century expressing enduring issues and values. 
ENGL 498: Special Topics	3 Credits	 The Great Traditions in English Literature (3)( GH)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Students are expected to learn fundamental skills of close textual analysis in the context of established literary texts of English and Irish fiction, drama, and poetry from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century that address large questions of ethical and social value. They are also expected to learn to talk and write clearly about the issues and ideas generated by the texts that they are directed to read. 
ENGL 499: Foreign Study--English	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	 will require all students to confront the major interpretive problems found in their assigned readings and to participate actively in the various forms of critical thinking required to comprehend and resolve those problems. 
MATH 2: Elementary Geometry With Problem Solving	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	 will require all students to participate in an assessment of the social behavior and other values, both communal and scholarly, relevant to the texts being read and discussed in the course. This course fulfills a General Education humanities requirement or a Bachelor of Arts humanities requirement.
MATH 3: Basic Skills	3 Credits	
MATH 4: Intermediate Algebra	3 Credits	 is a lecture/discussion course that addresses major works of English and Irish fiction, drama, and poetry from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century. The course is designed to give students an introductory appreciation of a wide range of established works of literature written in English. The goal of this course is not only to give students a sense of literary history, but also to encourage students to question how such texts express larger concerns about issues and values central to human experience. English 2 is designed to prepare students for additional college-level literature courses and to help students learn the fundamental skills of close textual analysis vital to all humanistic study. This Honors section is enriched by more rigorous requirements (longer papers, and a research component to each paper where the student is required to cite and engage critical sources and conversations). Participation requirements are also enhanced, making for a richer honors experience.
MATH 10: Preparation Skills for Success in Mathematics	3 Credits	Intensive practice in writing sentences and paragraphs and instruction in grammar, usage, and punctuation. Designed for students with deficient preparation. This course may not be used to satisfy the basic minimum requirements for graduation in any baccalaureate degree program.
MATH 21: College Algebra I	3 Credits	Tutorial instruction in composition and rhetoric for students currently enrolled in 
MATH 22: College Algebra II and Analytic Geometry	3 Credits	 or 
MATH 26: Plane Trigonometry	3 Credits	. This course may not be used to satisfy the basic minimum requirements for graduation in any baccalaureate degree program.
MATH 26H: Plane Trigonometry	3 Credits	Required one hour a week meeting time; readings, professional development, advising, community-building.  ENGL 006 Creative Writing Common Time (1 per semester/maximum of 8) This course is to be required of all B.F.A. in Creative Writing majors at Penn State Erie as long as they are students in that degree program. This means that every semester they are working toward the B.F.A. in Creative Writing they must sign up for this course, and they must complete it successfully. Successful completion is based on regular attendance at the various functions, all held at the same one hour time period each week. The purpose of this course is to provide students with the necessary experience of listening to the writers of national stature brought to campus through The Smith Series, to provide them with lectures by both faculty and outside experts to help them develop professionally as writers, to allow for essential group advising for successful completion of the major, and to foster a sense of community among the student writers in the program.
MATH 30: Problem Solving	3 Credits	
MATH 33: Mathematics for Sustainability	3 Credits	 is an intensive, rhetorically based experience in reading and writing that will prepare you both to understand the communications that surround you and to succeed in your own communication efforts. Thus, in this course, we will focus specifically on analyzing verbal and visual texts (our reading) as well as on producing such texts (our writing)  always in terms of rhetorical principles. Even if the term rhetoric isnt familiar to you, you bring a good deal of rhetorical skill to this class: you already know how to gauge the way you perceive and produce language according to the speaker, the intended audience, and the purpose. You may not always gauge perfectly, your perception may not always be accurate, and your production may not always be successful  but you still often try to interpret and choose language that is appropriate to the rhetorical situation. When you do not succeed, you often try again. The goal of 
MATH 34: The Mathematics of Money	3 Credits	, then, is to help you build on what you already know how to do as you become a more confident reader and writer. You will become more attuned to your goals as a writer, more aware of the ongoing conversation surrounding the topic, and more resourceful in terms of the appropriate delivery of your information, the rhetorical appeals at your disposal, and the needs and expectations of your audience. You will also learn to research and synthesize multiple outside sources in order to support your arguments effectively and ethically. In other words, we hope you'll come to write with skill, conviction, sophistication, and grace  if not immediately, then soon. In the process, you'll learn how to read more critically as well.
MATH 35: General View of Mathematics	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	Instruction and practice in writing expository prose that shows sensitivity to audience and purpose.
MATH 36: Insights Into Mathematics	3 Credits/Maximum of 3	
MATH 37: Finite Mathematics	3 Credits	 Enhanced prepares students to understand the functions of and produce a variety of texts for public and academic audiences. Class size is limited to 18 (as opposed to the regular 24) and provides individualized instruction, regular engagement with peers, and weekly online tutorials. The combination of these resources helps familiarize students with conventional genres and practices of usage and style written discourse. The course is cohort-based and paced, which means that there is an established start and end date, and that students will have weekly deadlines to meet throughout the term.
MATH 38: Elementary Linear Algebra	3 Credits	Instruction and practice in writing expository prose that shows sensitivity to audience and purpose.
MATH 40: Algebra, Trigonometry, and Analytic Geometry	3 Credits	Writing practice for specially qualified and screened students. Students who have passed a special writing test will qualify for this course.
MATH 41: Trigonometry and Analytic Geometry	3 Credits	Writing practice for specially qualified and screened students. Students who have passed a special writing test will qualify for this course.
MATH 81: Technical Mathematics I	3 Credits	Writing practice for specially qualified and screened students. Students who have passed a special writing test will qualify for this course.
MATH 82: Technical Mathematics II	3 Credits	If you enjoy writing to express yourself creatively - you will be at home in this course. You will also be at home here if you are an avid reader of fiction, poetry, and nonfiction, but have never tried your hand at writing it. In 
MATH 83: Technical Calculus	3 Credits	 you will explore the genres of nonfiction, fiction, and poetry by reading published essays, short stories, and poems and by writing personal essays, sketches, scenes, and poems. We'll discuss the relationship between the genres and also discuss what makes each a distinct art form. You'll hand in regular writing assignments in addition to completing longer writing projects. You'll share some of your creative work to discuss in class.
MATH 97: Special Topics	3 Credits	This course provides students with an introduction to, and extensive practice in, creative writing in the three genres of fiction, nonfiction, and poetry. The course includes instruction in principles of composition in each genre, as well as techniques of literary composition that cross and interlink those genres. If you enjoy writing to express yourself creatively--you will be at home in this course. You will also be at home here if you are an avid reader of fiction, poetry, and nonfiction, but have never tried your hand at writing it. In English 50H you will explore the genres of nonfiction, fiction, and poetry by reading published essays, short stories, and poems and by writing personal essays, sketches, scenes, and poems. We'll discuss the relationship between the genres and also discuss what makes each a distinct art form. You'll hand in regular writing assignments in addition to completing longer writing projects. You'll share some of your creative work to discuss in class. This is an honors course.
MATH 110: Techniques of Calculus I	3 Credits	Each section of the course will focus on a well-defined body of scholarship that is topical in the discipline, such as "Ethical Dilemmas in Literature," "Individual Freedom and Social Constraint in Literature," "Global Cultures, Local Identities," "American Landscapes, American Literatures," "Shakespeare," "Vital Rhetorics," and "Turning 2000: Nostalgia and Popular Culture at the Turn of the Century." In addition to the academic topic and issues of this course, students can expect to gain a general introduction to the University as an academic community and have the opportunity to explore their responsibilities as members of that community. Students will develop an understanding of the learning tools and resources available to them, including the opportunity to develop relationships with faculty and other students who share their academic interests. Each section of 83S will require active class participation from all students and a minimum of three substantial written assignments. Each of these written assignments will take one of the following forms: essay, essay exam, or a semester long reading journal. The course fulfills a General Education humanities requirement or a bachelor of arts humanities requirement.
MATH 111: Techniques of Calculus II	3 Credits	Australian and New Zealand cultural and social perspectives, with emphasis on the historical development of intellectual, aesthetic, and humanistic values. 
MATH 140: Calculus With Analytic Geometry I	3 Credits	 Australian/New Zealand Cultural Perspectives (3) (GH)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. Students are expected to learn fundamental skills of close textual analysis in the context of the study of a variety of works by authors from Australia and New Zealand. Studying a range of novels, poems, plays, and works of non-fiction, students will discuss the development of Australian and New Zealander literatures in historical context and gain understanding of the historical development of societal values in nations other than the U.S.A. The course aspires to relate geography and history to emerging social and cultural developments as the state and status of the two countries changed during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and to track their increasing separation from the "Mother Country"; (i.e. Great Britain) as they developed a sense of themselves as different and separate from European societies. The process was neither comfortable nor easy, nor steadily progressive, but the record of it is an often fascinating story of human endeavor and struggle, very frequently against great odds and disappointments, which in turn affected the development of national character if such a thing can be said to exist.The literatures reflect some of the attitudes and qualities that emerged as the two societies were coming into being and forging their own unique identities.
MATH 140A: Calculus, Analytic Geometry, Algebra, and Trigonometry	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
MATH 140B: Calculus and Biology I	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
MATH 140E: Calculus with Engineering Applications I	3 Credits	An examination of English sounds, words, and syntax using traditional, structural, and transformational grammar.
MATH 140G: Calculus with Earth and Mineral Sciences Applications I	3 Credits	Fred Lewis Pattee's career at Penn State marks the beginning of a heyday for the study of American literature. By the 1930s, prominent American critic Granville Hicks hailed what he dubbed "the great tradition of American literature" as a series of key themes in American writing, including folk traditions, politics, business, labor, social critique, fugitives, and flight. Since Hicks's time, literary scholars have contested the very notion of any "great tradition," because so many different authors have always participated in the American literary scene. This course examines American literature by looking at the dynamic and varied literary productions that, across time, have comprised the American literary canon, even as it calls into question the notion of whether America ever had a single literary canon, whether historically or in the present day. Students will learn how access to educational institutions, to writing equipment, and to printed and graphic materials all influenced who might become an author, and who, a reader. They will also learn how changing political and cultural institutions influenced writers' literary production and literary achievements. With text selection at the instructors' discretion, students will study poetry, fiction, non-fiction, oratory, and drama, and they will examine many of the most enduring themes in American literature: religion; moral and ethical ideals; the lure of mobility, especially upward mobility (or absence of it); gender dynamics; enslavement, abolitionism, and emancipation; race and ethnicity; the lure (and social complications) of the American West; American pragmatism; love and loss; hope and despair. Students will be asked to take up such questions as the following: Who has had a voice in American literary history? Why are some writers more frequently studied than others? Who determined what should be considered "great" literature inside the academy? In what ways does the study of American literary history uphold American values of freedom and freedom of expression? Who had access to publication, when, and under what circumstances? How does the publishing marketplace influence readers' choices regarding "great" American literature? How do educational institutions influence readers' choices? The course aims to provide a foundation for further study of American literature by equipping students with an understanding of the American literary past and its complex relationship to American culture and to American educational, political, and marketing institutions. Instructors might examine one or two key themes in the tradition, or they might ask students to learn about sweeping literary movements across time.
MATH 140H: Honors Calculus with Analytic Geometry I	3 Credits	Study of the English Bible as a literary and cultural document. 
MATH 141: Calculus with Analytic Geometry II	3 Credits	 The Bible as Literature (3) (GH) (BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the literature of the Bible. Throughout this course, students will examine the language, thought, images, and structures of the book that has arguably proved the central text of Western literature. Students will also actively explore the ways in which the Bible has shaped the literature of English-speaking cultures. Students will read substantial portions of the Old and New Testaments, learning to read critically and to interpret the Bible as they would any other literary text. They will also learn about the historical construction of the Bible and contemplate the competing versions of existing Biblical texts. Students will be asked to complete at least three writing assignments.
MATH 141B: Calculus and Biology II	3 Credits	Survey of popular culture, folklife, and ethnicity, synthesizing material from such areas as literature, media, entertainment, print, music, and film. 
MATH 141E: Calculus with Engineering Applications II	3 Credits	 / 
MATH 141G: Calculus with Earth and Mineral Sciences Applications II	3 Credits	 American Popular Culture and Folklife (3) (GH;US) (BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements.
MATH 141H: Honors Calculus with Analytic Geometry II	3 Credits	 / 
MATH 197: Special Topics	3 Credits	 covers a broad scope of materials, which may range from early to contemporary American folk and popular cultures. While selected topics for reading and discussion often vary from class to class, all courses focus on a critical examination of a variety of popular and fold cultures in order to produce an enriched understanding of America and its inhabitants. To meet this goal, popular and folk cultures will be examined from a variety of perspectives, including literature, history, politics, film, race, gender, class, and geography. Course requirements frequently include: essay exams, papers, journal entries, vigorous class discussion, and course talk participation. Technology is often incorporated into the class well, this course (or 
MATH 199: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	) is a requirement for the American Studies major and minor, and offers students valuable experience in critical thinking, analysis, and writing. Non-American Studies majors and minors may use this course to fulfill a general education or Bachelor of Arts/Humanities credit. 
MATH 200: Problem Solving in Mathematics	3 Credits	 / 
MATH 200H: Problem Solving in Mathematics	3 Credits	 serves as a broad introduction to American popular and folk cultures as well as interpretive strategies relevant to the study of cultures and individuals. The course, as a result, provides preparation for more advanced courses in American studies, American literature, and American history.
MATH 201: Problem Solving in Mathematics II	3 Credits	This course is offered in tandem with The Lynd Ward Graphic Novel Prize, sponsored and administered by Penn State University (the first prize of its kind in the United States). The Lynd Ward Prize is awarded annually to the best graphic novel, fiction or non-fiction, published in the previous calendar year by a living U.S. or Canadian citizen or resident. The course provides background for the history of the graphic novel in the United States, with a focus on Lynd Ward's woodcut novels from the 1930s. Students also study the winning book, attend the award ceremony and public talk from the creator(s), and meet with the creator(s) to discuss their work. This is a one-credit course with limited meetings.
MATH 210: Calculus with Engineering Technology Applications	3 Credits	Practice in writing and editing articles for the campus newspaper.
MATH 211: Intermediate Calculus and Differential Equations with Applications	3 Credits	This course familiarizes students with the range of professional possibilities offered by the English major.
MATH 220: Matrices	3 Credits	An introduction to the literature that has been written by Pennsylvania authors from the colonial era through the present day.  
MATH 220H: Honors Matrices	3 Credits	 Pennsylvania Literature (3) (GH;US) The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the variety of literature that has been written and published by Pennsylvania authors from the colonial era through the present day. This course explores how the literature written in Pennsylvania relates to historical developments within the Commonwealth, and to literary, cultural, and historical developments across the United States and throughout the world. Toward that end, the course provides a chronological survey of developments in the literature of Pennsylvania through readings from the work of Pennsylvania authors whose work illuminates developments in literary history and exemplifies important aspects of Pennsylvania history and culture.
MATH 230: Calculus and Vector Analysis	3 Credits	This course will familiarize students with expressions of love in Western arts and literature. Students will analyze the artistic, philosophical and literary representations of courtship, friendship, homoeroticism, sexuality, marriage, adultery, and familial bonds and explore how the preceding phenomena are inflected by gender roles, race and miscegenation, and class and religious differences. We will also trace the way particular narratives about love have been adapted by different artistic media. Love is a universal human experience and its study transcends disciplinary boundaries. It is a linchpin of human existence, uniting and enriching nearly any subject worthy of serious study.
MATH 230H: Honors Calculus and Vector Analysis	3 Credits	This class studies how art, literature, film, and other media can help us to gain a perspective on one of the most horrific events in human history, the Holocaust: the genocidal murder of more than six million men, women, and children (mostly Jewish) under the Nazi regime during World War II. We will also examine the theoretical questions involved in any attempt to capture what appears to be beyond our comprehension, in terms of moral outrage and the sheer scale, inhumanity, and bureaucratic efficiency. To this end we will study literary works, such as Primo Levi's Survival in Auschwitz, films such as Steven Spielberg's Schindler's List, Roman Polanski's The Pianist, and Roberto Benigni's Life is Beautiful, as well as photographs, poems, artworks, installations, museum architecture, the design of monuments and other artifacts. We will also examine questions of memorialization (Holocaust museums and memorials), national guilt, survivor's guilt, stigmatization, and the ethics of historical representation.
MATH 231: Calculus of Several Variables	3 Credits	
MATH 231H: Honors Calculus of Several Variables	3 Credits	 constitutes a broad introduction to Shakespeare's dramatic works from a variety of thematic, historical, formal, and/or generic vantages. Students will practice close reading Shakespeare's language while also learning how his plays reflect upon the social and theatrical conventions of the historical period in which they were written and performed. Approaches taken to the plays will vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of Shakespeare's plays, a consideration of a principal Shakespearean theme or themes through a number of plays from across Shakespeare's career, a consideration of Shakespeare's protagonists through a number of plays from across Shakespeare's career, or a consideration of a number of Shakespeare's plays in historical context. The class will attend to issues such as gender, social class, politics, sexuality, and race, and students will learn how Renaissance perspectives on these issues differed from their own. In order to analyze how Shakespeare's plays continue to be adapted and transformed, the class may also involve the study of modern stage and film performances of Shakespeare. Time allotted for the discussion of each play will vary, but students should expect to read, on average, one play every 1-2 weeks. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in early modern literatures as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts.
MATH 232: Integral Vector Calculus	3 Credits	
MATH 250: Ordinary Differential Equations	3 Credits	 constitutes a broad introduction to Shakesepeare's dramatic works from a variety of thematic, historical, formal, and/or generic vantages. Students will practice close reading Shakespeares language while also learning how his plays reflect upon the social and theatrical conventions of the historical period in which they were written and performed. Approaches taken to the plays will vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of Shakespeare's plays, a consideration of a principal Shakespearean theme or themes through a number of plays from across Shakespeare's career, a consideration of Shakespeare's protagonists through a number of plays from across Shakespeare's career, or a consideration of a number of Shakespeare's plays in historical context. The class will attend to issues such as gender, social class, politics, sexuality, and race, and students will learn how Renaissance perspectives on these issues differed from their own. In order to analyze how Shakespeare's plays continue to be adapted and transformed, the class may also involve the study of modern stage and film performances of Shakespeare. Time allotted for the discussion of each play will vary, but students should expect to read, on average, one play every 1-2 weeks. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in early modern literatures as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts.
MATH 251: Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations	3 Credits	Popular texts (printed, visual, and aural texts) and their social, political, and cultural significance in the contemporary world.  
MATH 251H: Honors Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations	3 Credits	 Reading Popular Texts (3) (GH) ELISH 130: Reading Popular Texts explores a variety of popular texts with the goal of enabling students to sharpen their ability to interpret the social, political, and cultural significance of such texts in the contemporary world. For the purposes of this course, the term &quot;texts&quot; is defined broadly, to include printed texts (books, periodicals, and hypertext), visual texts (film, television, visual arts and graphics), and aural texts (music, sound, and spoken word). Since these texts are primarily examples of popular culture-pervasive, self -replicating, commercialized artifacts of the contemporary scene-they are familiar to the general student outside the classroom. Too often, however, students have not seen such texts subjected to the same kind of critical reading as more elite cultural forms (e.g., canonized literature, art, and music). As a result, the general student in particular benefits from learning that cultural phenomena to which she or he is exposed on a daily basis have layers of significance as yet unexplored or unrealized. The purpose of the course is fulfilled if such students come away from it with a sharpened awareness of the role that popular texts play in their daily lives and the means to discuss and explain their influence-in short, to read their culture more critically.
MATH 252: Partial Differential Equations	3 Credits	This course will provide an introduction to Jewish American literature through a historical survey of the tradition's key texts, figures, and themes. The course will focus on the defining aspects of the literature and on what the literature "thinks" about Jewish American culture and identity. But rather than assuming a unity to Jewish-American culture, this course will use Jewish literature to seek ways of articulating and representing both the points of cohesion and the points of divergence that characterize Jewish life in America. The United States has absorbed large numbers of Jewish immigrants hailing from many parts of the world, holding many different ideas about Jewish practice, and affiliating themselves with many different political, social, and cultural traditions. Moreover, Jews have settled and made homes in a wide variety of American communities. This course aims to explore Jewish American culture's marked diversity by offering a literary window onto the major fault-lines running through Jewish American culture: lines demarcated by gender, by political affiliation, by geography, by pre-immigration community by religious practice, by attitude toward world Jewry, by national allegiance, and by minhag (or custom), to name just a few. The class therefore provides an opportunity to consider the constitution, origin, and development of Jewish American's identity and social formations by looking at how that identity and those social formations exist and what they "do" in literature written by and about Jews in America. Materials will consist predominantly of primary texts, including prose fiction and nonfiction, poetry, drama, and film. Course methodology will emphasize the close reading of these texts. The course complements offerings in Jewish Studies and English, and it will satisfy the GH and US requirements. Most obviously, the course will offer students of Jewish literature, world literature, and American literature an opportunity for contextualization. It enables students in Jewish Studies to study the rich literature of American Jews, and it adds to courses covering Jewish American history, religion, and culture. The course offers students in English a valuable, sustained introduction to an important U.S. and world sub-culture.
MATH 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	
MATH 297: Special Topics	3 Credits	 Modern American Literature to World War II (3) (GH)(BA)(US) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. 
MATH 310: Elementary Combinatorics	3 Credits	 will constitute a wide ranging study of modernist American literature, and may include novels, short stories, poems, plays, and non-fictional prose, written roughly between the turn of the 19th century and the end of the Second World War. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of modernist American literature, a consideration of a principle theme or themes common to modernist American literature through a number of works from across the period, a consideration of a number of modernist works in the context of historical events central to the period, such as the American participation in the First World War and/or the effect on American literature of the ensuing world-wide economic depression. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in modernist literatures as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts. The course may be used as English Major elective credit or as credit towards the English Minor. Non-English majors may use this course to fulfill a general education, U.S. cultures, or Bachelor of Arts/Humanities requirement.
MATH 310A: Concepts in Combinatorics - Recitation	1-6 Credits/Maximum of 6	
MATH 310H: Honors Concepts of Combinatorics	1-6 Credits/Maximum of 6	 serves as a survey of and introduction to strands of American comedy and satire from its eighteenth- and nineteenth-century roots through its many directions in the twentieth century. Students will read works from multiple literary genres-poetry, novel, short story, drama, and essay, for instance. The course will help students to understand how both formal and contextual considerations shape American comedy through the centuries. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but selected texts will represent many variations of comedy embodied in American literature and present across an evolving media landscape. 
MATH 311M: Honors Concepts of Discrete Mathematics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 is a General Education course in the General Humanities domain. 
MATH 311W: Concepts of Discrete Mathematics	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	 can also be used as a requirement for the English major and minor.
MATH 312: Concepts of Real Analysis	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	United States writers from diverse backgrounds offering varying responses to issues such as race, class, gender, and ethnicity.
MATH 312A: Honors Concepts of Real Analysis - Recitation	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	United States writers from diverse backgrounds offering varying responses to issues such as race, class, gender, and ethnicity.
MATH 312H: Honors Concepts of Real Analysis	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	This course considers the contemporary graphic novel (also known as graphic fiction, comics, or sequential narrative) as a literary medium that joins image and text. Course texts engage issues such as contemporary identity, alienation, ethnicity, sexuality and history (personal, family, and national). The course explores the aesthetic of sequential narrative, its formal properties and generic range, its methods of production and consumption, and its place in a contemporary culture of reading.
MATH 313A: Concepts of Geometry - Recitation	1-12 Credits/Maximum of 12	Rhetoric and Civic Life (RCL) is a year-long honors course offering comprehensive training in oral, written, visual, and digital communication. It unites these various modes under the flexible art of rhetoric and uses rhetoric both to strengthen communication skills and to sharpen awareness of the challenges and advantages presented by oral, written, visual, and digital modes. This portion of the course, CAS/ENGL 137 focuses particularly on two critical academic capacities: analyzing and contextualizing. In this semester, students learn to rigorously examine the rhetoric surrounding them, compellingly present their findings in various modes, and thoughtfully contextualize their research. In this course, students will: -Develop a rich understanding of rhetorical concepts -Practice application of concepts and terms in expressing understanding of effectiveness of rhetoric through analysis and contextualization of existing texts -Enhance communication skills by practicing and applying in a variety of communication modes (written, oral, digital)
MATH 313H: Concepts of Geometry	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	This course builds rhetorical skills in oral, written, visual, and digital contexts and introduces deliberation and advocacy in civic and disciplinary spheres.  CAS (ENGL) 138T Rhetoric and Civic Life II (3) (GWS)ENGL/
MATH 314: PMASS Problem Solving Seminar	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	, Rhetoric and Civic Life II, expands knowledge and aptitudes built in ENGL/
MATH 315: Foundations of Mathematics	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	 by asking students to use rhetorical skills and principles to develop strategies for persuasion and advocacy in the context of civic issues. The course continues the multimodal emphasis--the focus on oral, written, visual, and digital communication--used in 137H and adds new components as well. Students will develop a repertoire of communication skills through hands-on practice at composing and delivering speeches and essays, and they will work with digital media to create multimedia texts, podcasts, and websites. Students will reflect on these different modes as themselves rhetorical choices. The course's civic and ethical components take center stage as students learn how to deliberate important public issues thoughtfully and with civility and respect. They will learn the difference between persuasion and advocacy and develop strategies for both in the context of pertinent local, national, and global issues. They will participate in a public deliberation forum on topics they generate and vote on. The forum will be organized to allow small deliberative action groups as well as large forum-style meetings. The course focuses on ethics in many contexts, e.g., community action and public deliberation; ethics of persuasion; ethical controversies in the disciplines. Students will be encouraged to explore percolating disciplinary interests and to share knowledge in online disciplinary communities. Students will work throughout the semester to design and build a final electronic portfolio that represents their academic work with an eye to their imagined professional futures. The portfolio assignment is designed to permit assessment of learning outcomes and encourage students to move toward qualifying for the College of the Liberal Arts Excellence in Communication Certificate (http://laus.la.psu.edu/current-students/paterno-fellows-program/excellence-in-communication-certificate), a mechanism which helps students hone their communication abilities throughout their Penn State careers by creating and perfecting an online portfolio.
MATH 315H: PMASS Colloquium	1-18 Credits/Maximum of 18	This course offers an introduction to African American literature from the early writings of slavery and freedom to the works of present-day African American authors. We will explore the major themes, literary traditions and narrative strategies that merge and shape this body of literature, considering, for example, the influence of double-consciousness, questions of authenticity and performance, representations of blackness and whiteness, the significance of place, and the persistent presence of folklore and vernacular traditions. Our analyses of texts will be attentive to the intersections of race, class, gender, and sexuality, and by the end of the course you will be able to discuss fluently several literary techniques and strategies including irony, satire, narration, voice, characterization, imagery, style and setting. We will situate texts in their various historical and cultural contexts, and you will be introduced to key literary concepts and terms that should inform your reading and writing about these texts. You will learn how to analyze literature, do close and careful readings of texts and write persuasively about literary works. Students will engage in thoughtful, creative and open-minded class discussions, analyze literature and do close and careful readings of texts.
MATH 318: Elementary Probability	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Fiction, poetry, and drama, including such writers as Baldwin, Douglass, Ellison, Morrison, and Wright.
MATH 319: Applied Statistics in Science	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Writers such as Baldwin, Beckett, Bellow, Ellison, Gordimer, Lessing, Lowell, Mailer, Naipaul, Pinter, Plath, Pynchon, Rushdie, and Walker.  
MATH 399: Foreign Studies	2-6 Credits/Maximum of 6	 Contemporary Literature (3) (GH)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. 
MATH 401: Introduction to Analysis I	2-6 Credits/Maximum of 6	 will constitute a wide-ranging study of contemporary literature written in English, including novels, short stories, poems, plays, and prose, written roughly between the end of the Second World War and the present. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include writers such as Baldwin, Beckett, Bellow, Ellison, Erdrich, Delillo, Kingston, Lee, Pynchon, Gordimer, Lessing, Lowell, Mailer, Naipaul, Pinter, Plath, Rushdie, Silko, and Walker. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of contemporary literature, a consideration of a principle theme or themes common to contemporary literature through a number of works from across the period, a consideration of a number of contemporary works in the context of historical events central to the period, a consideration of a number of contemporary works in the context of formal or aesthetic elements common to those works and their various effects. Time allotted for the study of the works under consideration will vary. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in post-modern and contemporary literatures as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts. Students will be evaluated by means of essays written in and out of class, essay exams, term-long reading journals, and class participation. Students should expect to complete a minimum of three written assignments in the course of the term. The course may be used as English major elective credit or as credit towards the English minor. Non-English majors may use this course to fulfill a General Education or Bachelor of Arts/Humanities. The course will be offered once a year with 60 seats per offering.
MATH 403: Classical Analysis I	3 Credits	
MATH 403H: Honors Classical Analysis I	3 Credits	 offers a wide-ranging study of contemporary literature written in English across different forms and/or media. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors and texts under consideration will vary by instructor. Topics under consideration will likewise vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of contemporary literature, a consideration of a principle theme or themes common to contemporary literature through a number of works, a consideration of a number of contemporary works in the context of historical events central to the period, a consideration of a number of contemporary works in the context of formal or aesthetic elements common to those works and their various effects.
MATH 404: Classical Analysis II	3 Credits	This course will allow students to study African American literature, culture, history, and arts in connection with an annual public event, the African American Read-In (AARI). The AARI, promoting literacy and appreciation of African American literature, is a national event established in 1990 under the auspices of the National Council of Teachers of English. It has become a regular feature of Black History Monthcelebrated by community, neighborhood, and church groups as well as schools and institutions of higher education throughout the United States and elsewhere on a given Sunday and Monday in Februaryattracting more than a million participants annually. This course offers students an engaged learning experience in which they will produce original intellectual and artistic content to be presented publicly at an AARI event on campus. Students will study texts from a range of historical periods and/or genres, and thus gain a solid introduction to the African American literary tradition. At the same time, the primary organizing principle of the course will be a particular theme that both allows a broad and coherent overview of a significant cultural or historical topic and engages issues of cultural diversity in the United States. The specific theme, thus, will bring the study of African American literature into a broader interdisciplinary context that intersects with African American culture, history, identity, and the struggle for equality. Students will study texts that relate to this annual theme and participate in a relevant field trip (museum, theater, cultural site, library, etc.) to deepen their understanding of the significance and contextssocial, historical, cultural, artisticof these materials and this theme. They will then develop this knowledge through creative and critical engagements into exhibitions, presentations, or performances to communicate their insights about a particular author, text, or topic in in the African American literary tradition. As shapers of the AARI program on their campus, class members will also have a voice in designing and planning the AARI as well as a stake in its overall success. As this course necessarily spans semesters, students who enroll in the Fall course will be expected to enroll in the Spring course in order to present their projects at the AARI in February. Only students who were enrolled in the Fall course will be permitted to enroll in the Spring, as it is the culmination of the same course.
MATH 405: Advanced Calculus for Engineers and Scientists I	3 Credits	The course explores two streams in parallel. Students will examine selected historic landmarks in science (e.g. evolution, atomic energy/weapons, climate change, biotechnology), with a focus on common misconceptions about the facts and practice of science. The course will also examine the development of literary and popular portrayals of science and scientists in their political, economic, social and cultural contexts, paired to these particular scientific developments. By considering past and current scientific problems, students will refine their quantitative and analytical skills. By considering scientific writing, novels, short stories, graphic novels, cinema, poetry, and other forms, students will refine their critical and reflective writing and speaking about both the rhetorical and discursive practices of science writing, and the social and cultural impact of literature in popular understandings of science.
MATH 406: Advanced Calculus for Engineers and Scientists II	3 Credits	Students will learn about Irish literature in the twentieth century and beyond; focus on the interplay of poltical, social, and cultural forces brought to bear on Irish literature, history, and politics from the early twentieth century to the present. The course will begin with the socio-political implications of the Home Rule movement and the important figures associated with the rise of the Irish Literary Renaissance. Instructors will spend much of the course focusing on canonical figures of modern Irish Literature (such as Joyce, Yeats, Synge, Beckett, Shaw,O'Casey,O'Flaherty, and Lady Gregory). The course will introduce students to the political context and themes of Irish Literary Renaissance (Irish Literary Renaissance), including cultural nationalism. Instructors may draw upon contemporary literary critics, such as Declan Kiberd, Seamus Deane, and Terence Brown, by way of introduction to the ILR. The class will then move on to Post-World War II Irish Literature. In this component of the course, instructors will select literature from writers who began publishing in the Post-War era. These authors may be examined as they follow the legacy of the ILR, or as they challenge it and forge new courses for Irish literature. In other words, these authors can be writing within or against the traditions and themes of ILR artists;or, more likely, doing both things at once. This component of the course will help students see the enduring legacy of the themes and forms of the ILR, as Irish authors continually reckon with its massive political and cultural inheritance. The course fulfills IL requirements in its emphasis on postcolonial relationships between Irish identity and culture and issues of British colonial occupation and the influence of American popular culture in the later twentieth century. The interpretive framework of postcolonial studies will inform the instructor's approach to the literature. Postcolonial studies seeks to examine the conditions and tropes of colonial and post-colonial writers and peoples. While postcolonial studies offers broad theories and concepts that can be applied to any postcolonial scene, the movement nonetheless has an interest in studying and honoring the regional particularities and the specific reaction of its writers to the postcolonial moment. This interplay of the unifying, international experience of colonialism with the particularity of individual nations and writers helps students to become sensitive to ideas of nation, unity, and difference. More so, the tropes of postcolonial literature, and Irish literature especially--focus on concepts of hybridity, the Other, contact zones, modernity vs. tradition, national identity, and personal identity, all on which seek to understand the self and others within an intercultural context. The literature of the IRL also explores the corrosive effects of British imperialism, which helps students to consider whether might makes right; and interrogate various forms of cultural imperialism, then and now. The literature of the IRL also promotes themes of intercultural understanding, featuring examples of reconciliation and compromise between tradition and modernity, and, more importantly, between Irish, American, and British characters. Assignments will help students focus on issues of identity construction, and social and political conflicts within and between cultures (Ireland in relationship to British and American culture and influence) within a post-colonial context.
MATH 410: Complex Analysis for Mathematics and Engineering	3 Credits	When Thomas Jefferson elevated one pursuit to stand with life and liberty as inalienable rights, he eschewed others. The Declaration of Independence features the pursuit of happiness rather than that of amusements, consumer goods, status, money, or ease. Happiness carried a history of deeper meanings in philosophy and religion. In 1776, "happiness" peppered discussions of individualism, rights, civilization, economics, and government, and echoed Ancient Greek dialogues about virtue and civil society. In America, "happiness" joined the religious language of salvation, rapture, and joy to define states of grace. By the twentieth century, happiness became suspect as the term frequently represented a superficial type of enjoyment in needless consumption manipulated through marketing. As happiness came to be twined with wealth and goods, so too did it align increasingly with success in all pursuits. Happiness became a form of winning and a status marker whose overt pursuit was as likely to lead to psychological and social problems as to health. We open with ancient philosophers and modern positive psychologists. The pursuit of happiness reached zenith speed in the history of American literature. From transcendentalists, to pragmatists, self-help, children's fantasy, psychoanalysis, or post-modernism, genres fell out of themselves in the pursuit to merely understand happiness. Novels, poems, memoirs, films, popular psychology, medical literature, memes, and blogs addressed happiness from nearly every conceivable angle to explore strategies such as choosing positive thoughts; stilling thoughts; cultivating enriching interests and habits; influencing our moods and emotions; and optimizing strategies for securing the resources, skill-sets, possessions, and relationships that encourage happiness. Some of these achievements aligned with health and economic benefits and introduced limitations in access or cultural relevance. Bio-behaviorists are exploring correlation vs. causation and ways of assessing social and individual well-being. Bringing modern bio-behavioral methodologies into the chronological narrative creates unprecedented opportunities for integrative study. Experiential elements of wellness fulfill goals of General Health and Wellness, identifying "wellness as a positive state of well-being, not merely the absence of disease." Students will learn the most promising research on generating tangible, healthful benefits in individuals and communities and be introduced to sources for further learning, continuing to learn and pursue long-term happiness.
MATH 411: Ordinary Differential Equations	3 Credits/Maximum of 6	Communicating Care 
MATH 412: Fourier Series and Partial Differential Equations	3 Credits/Maximum of 6	 / 
MATH 414: Introduction to Probability Theory	1 Credits	 / 
MATH 415: Introduction to Mathematical Statistics	1 Credits	 What do we talk about when we talk about health? Our states of well-being and illness are topics that, like the weather, drive our daily conversations, but we rarely have time to study and practice these vital exchanges. Spoken in emergency rooms or on long-distance calls, by medical professionals, family members, or strangers making small talk, the languages we use to share pain and recovery require our knowledge of long-established scripts and our willingness to improvise. By exploring how these encounters draw from and work as textual and dramatic performances, this course will guide students to achieve a new level of literacy in the most essential communicative art of caring. Students will analyze health conversations in literary texts, such as short stories, poems, memoirs, and graphic novels. They will explore real-life scenarios drawn from their own experiences, fieldwork, social science theories, and published case studies. Developing skills in the humanities (GH), they will see how subjective, often individual experience, historical perspectives, and creative expression help people to communicate about health and care. Developing their abilities in the social and behavioral sciences (GS), they will see how theory provides insights to predict and understand health and practices of care, investigate objective perspectives and recognize the contributions of fieldwork and data-driven studies to analyzing and improving communication when health is a main concern. They will integrate these methodologies especially to pursue these fields' common goals of making beneficial connections between individuals and groups, and managing private and public life.
MATH 416: Stochastic Modeling	1-8 Credits/Maximum of 8	Is it possible to comprehend the mind of another species? Can humans communicate with other animals? Do they have anything to say? In 1859, the publication of Darwin's The Origin of Species set the stage for the scientific investigation of animal minds. This course studies both scientific and non-scientific approaches to the study of thinking and emotion in animals. Students contemplate what researchers, artists, philosophers, writers and filmmakers learn by investigating the minds of animals, focusing on breakthroughs as well as misconceptions. Students conduct their own research on such topics as animal cognition and intelligence, animal language, anthropomorphism, animal testing and bioethics. Examples will be drawn from a range of disciplines in an effort to answer the central question: what is an animal, and what is a human?
MATH 417: Qualitative Theory of Differential Equations	1-8 Credits/Maximum of 8	If you get a job out of college, work eight hours a day, fifty weeks a year, and retire at age 65, at that point you have will spent roughly one third of your adult, waking life at work. And that is just paid work. Add in housework, childcare, and other forms of unpaid labor and the share of your waking hours devoted to work creeps closer to one half. And those calculations may actually underestimate the influence work has over your life. What you do will determine where you live, how you live, and, perhaps, whether you believe you have ultimately done something meaningful with your life. With work playing such an outsized role in a life, you may as well understand it as best you can. Hence this class. In it, we approach the question of work from the perspective of two disciplines: labor and employment relations and literature. The field of labor and employment relations asks about the social and economic forces-markets, compensation, globalization, immigration, etc.-that shape work. By contrast, the discipline of literature takes a more subjective approach to the question of work. Very broadly speaking, it shows how the forces that shape work play out in individual lives. In short, it shows how individuals feel about the work they do or, in the case of the unemployed, they do not do. Together, the two disciplines provide a global and personal perspective on one of the most important parts of our lives. Students registering for the course will read representative selections from both domains, engage in course discussions, take exams, and write essays as they explore the variety of ways both labor and employment relations and Literature can prepare them for their work lives and help them understand the place of work in culture and society.
MATH 418: Introduction to Probability and Stochastic Processes for Engineering	3 Credits	This course introduces the verbal and nonverbal genres of folklore that have influenced literature, economics, politics and culture in North America. Approaching folklore as traditional patterns, practices, and performances, the course explains folklore to be fundamental to human cultural life, and therefore an intimate part of the identities and values that Americans express in contemporary society. It will explore these identities and values on various levels: the individual, the family, the community, the region, the nation, and the world. Folklore, you will discover, is not something confined to the past, but all around us in the present, and is continually emerging anew. Students will read and discuss a number of folk genres, including folk speech, narratives, beliefs and religious experiences, use of space, and material culture. Students will learn strategies for researching, "reading," and understanding the verbal and nonverbal folklore of diverse communities. The class may include readings on cultural traditions drawn from Native American, Latinx, African American, and immigrant cultures, as well as other folk groups defined by social identities such as age, occupation, gender, sexuality, or religion. By the end of the course, students will be able to recognize the cultural, political, and historical implications of such traditions. Assignments will include a fieldwork project; involving first-hand interviews, site observations, and archival research; to document, annotate, and analyze oral traditions. Students will be evaluated on the basis of class discussion, oral presentation and group exercises, in-class examinations, and the fieldwork portfolio.
MATH 418H: Probability	3 Credits	Exploring the Literature of Food: Current Trends in American Food Writing and Environmentalism" begins by demonstrating the deep history of environmentally-minded agriculture in American thought. In the sample course, an understanding of the relationship between environmentalism and farming is developed through a consideration of thinking about food and food production in texts from the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries. These texts might touch on the importance of notions about the political importance of yeoman farmers, thoughts on the blending of cultivation and wildness, and late-nineteenth-century critiques of cruel and unsanitary industrial food production. The class might then turn to texts that argue for a return to sustainable agriculture in terms of Jeffersonian democracy and the ideal of the citizen-farmer. The topics raised in the first portion of the course include environmentalism, the role of labor in America, and the history of the industrialization of farming in the post-World War II era. From these origins, the course progresses into a consideration of the contemporary moment. It is clear that a great deal of change has occurred since mid-twentieth century critiques, and students are encouraged to trace the development of topics from the first portion of the syllabus in the later material. For example, the development of organic food standards by the FDA has resulted in a new system of organic industrial agriculture, which is compared to small scale agriculture by Michael Pollan, and Eric Schlosser updates muckraking investigations of labor and sanitation by turning to modern investigative journalism into the production of meat and the standards of uniformity set by fast food chains. The course ends with a consideration of the future of food as writers have imagined it. With a recommended experiential component, students are learning about the history of food production and writing about it while they encounter farmers who practice sustainable agriculture. Ideally, students learn from both the literature and from the farmer how something as practical as the production of food can be informed by philosophy and literature.
MATH 419: Theoretical Mechanics	3 Credits	This course is an introduction to literature that takes as its subject the natural world. Students will practice the methods of ecologically oriented literary analysis (eco-criticism) and they will learn to contextualize the major historical periods, movements, and arguments for the necessity of literature about the natural world as it intersects with environmental studies. The course can cover anything considered "literature," but namely fiction, poetry, nonfiction, and drama. Students will examine not only strategies of description, but also literature's unique ability to showcase conflict, reflection, and insight when it comes to protecting our environment. The course should include literature that addresses the human impact on nature. Students should learn about familiar environments and unfamiliar environments. Students should also come to understand the motivations of the authors.
MATH 421: Complex Analysis	3 Credits	Examines the interconnection of culture and nature in the Chesapeake Bay region through the literature of the region.  
MATH 422: Wavelets and Fourier Analysis: Theory and Applications	3 Credits	 Adventure Literature: Exploring the Chesapeake Bay (4.5) The course focuses on a specific place--the Chesapeake Bay and its watershed--that has generated a distinctive regional identity and literature from its natural and social context. The course begins consideration of the concept of watershed, both as a geographical concept and a literary metaphor, before turning to an examination of the culture(s) and nature of the largest and most important tributary of the Bay, the Susquehanna River. Students will read texts associated with the history and the development of the Susquehanna, with some emphasis on logging, rafting, mining, and hydropower development. Readings here should aim at helping students see how a regional cultural identity has evolved from the river&rsquo;s geography and economics. Focus on the Bay itself, students can learn similar lessons. We begin by looking at the rich native cultures that occupied the region before the advent of Europeans and then move to initial European exploration and settlement. The class might then focus on development (agricultural, cultural, and industrial) of the Bay and Bay Region generally, through readings that might include regional histories and literary works like James Michener&rsquo;s Chesapeake: A Novel. Significant attention should be devoted to the sub-culture of the Chesapeake waterman, a regional identity that has generated its own mythology and folklore and has been the focus for numerous writers. Texts might be chosen to show the role nostalgia plays in conceptions of the Bay or the ways in which issues of race, class, and gender are raised by examining representations of the waterman culture. What students should see is how literature and culture are transformed over time, while resonances of former place identities remain. Finally, the course will turn to the Bay as it is today and how the representation of place and regional identity in literature has changed over time.This course was designed to include out-of-the-classroom educational experiences on the Susquehanna River and other tributes of the Bay and on the Chesapeake Bay itself. The trips should provide students opportunities to fully understand the interconnections of nature and culture in the Bay region. They should also allow students the chance to travel in the footsteps of the writers they read in venues throughout the region. The goal is to both see how a distinctive culture derived from the natural circumstances of the Chesapeake and to understand how that culture might continue (or not) into the future.
MATH 425: Introduction to Operations Research	3 Credits	Examines the interconnection of culture and nature on Cape Cod through considerations of texts in various literary genres that have contributed to development of a distinctive regional identity and culture.  
MATH 426: Introduction to Modern Geometry	3 Credits	 Adventure Literature: Exploring Cape Cod (4.5) The purpose of this course is to teach students how natural and cultural contexts contribute to the production of meaning in literary texts. In this case, the locality that serves as the focus of study is Cape Cod, arguably the most written-about locale in the United States. The course begins with classes devoted to the Cape&rsquo;s natural history&mdash;its formation and the ever-present effect of wind and water&mdash;and then moves to its early human history. Readings in the first part of the course will focus on the period just before and after European settlement and readings could include selections from William Bradford&rsquo;s Of Plymouth Plantation or Mourt&rsquo;s Relation, both contemporaneous accounts of the Pilgrim&rsquo;s landing on and exploration of the Cape and appropriate chapters from Paul Schneider&rsquo;s history of the Cape, The Enduring Shore, and Nathaniel Philbrick&rsquo;s excellent account of the Pilgrim adventure, Mayflower. These readings could be enhanced with selections on the European settlement of the Cape in Robert Finch&rsquo;s anthology of writing about the Cape, A Place Apart. This introductory material will lead to the major part of the course, which will be devoted to reading and study of classic literature about the Cape, such as Thoreau&rsquo;s Cape Cod, Henry Beston&rsquo;s The Outermost House, Wyman Richardson&rsquo;s The House on Nauset Marsh, and John Hay&rsquo;s The Great Beach, as well as selections of poetry poets associated with the Cape. Each of these works, in its time, represents the writer&rsquo;s attempt to somehow capture and come to terms with the landscape and natural exigencies of the Cape. The focus will then turn to representations of the Cape in the work of contemporary writers, and might include work by Michael Cunningham, Annie Dillard, David Gessner, Cynthia Huntington, and Mary Oliver among others. The course ends with a brief look at Cape Cod&rsquo;s literary and natural future as it has been imagined over the last 140 years.This course was designed to include an out-of-the-classroom education experience on Cape Cod. The trip to the cape should include experiences related to the cultural and natural history of the region, and it should provide students the opportunities to walk in the footsteps of William Bradford, Thoreau, Beston, and Hay, as well as opportunities to see for themselves how the natural features that have inspired the classic and contemporary writers of the Cape will continue to inspire future generations of artists.
MATH 427: Foundations of Geometry	3 Credits	
MATH 428: Geometry for Teachers	3 Credits	 -"The Beach: Exploring the Literature of the Atlantic Shore"-begins with some exploration of the dynamic forces at work on the barrier beach, with special attention to the ways in which great literature has taken what is described in the scientific literature and turned it into art. Examples for discussion are drawn from the work of such writers as Rachael Carson and Henry Beston. The general concerns of the course then move to environmental ethics, specifically as ethical questions are embodied in literatures representation of the human relationship with the other-than-human worldfrom such difficult-to-personify species as starfish, snakes, and spiders. General ethical questions then lead to specific treatments of human and wild animal interaction by various writers. The point is to explore how writers represent the optimal sort of relationship humans can have with the wild world, and what such representation might mean to the ways we personally interact with nature. From these opening considerations, the course turns to an examination of the way in which writers who focus on a specific region of the coast--South Atlantic barrier islands, for example-- establish a sense of the place in their writing. The course then narrows its focus even more, moving from a consideration of a regional cultural identity to that of specific towns or narrowly defined areas within the general region. This narrowed subject is explored in specific detail, beginning with pre-European cultures, the first explorers and settlers and then moving on to other aspects of the American culture history that make the subject area distinctive. For example, a course on the Low Country of South Carolina might start with the accounts of John Lawson, who published his journal of his own trip up the Santee River in 1701, move to accounts of the rice culture so important to the region in the nineteenth century and to the an examination of the Gullah Geechee culture established by West African slaves on Low Country plantations, and then move to writing from more recent writers, all of which help to define the areas distinctive cultural and particularly its literary identity.
MATH 429: Introduction to Topology	3 Credits	The purpose of 
MATH 430: Linear Algebra and Discrete Models I	3 Credits	 -"Exploring the Literature of American Wilderness"-is to study the literature and ideas associated with American wilderness in an experiential context; that is, the heart of this course should be an extended backpacking trip into a federally protected wilderness preserve. So the basic assumption on which this course is founded is that our understanding of literature and other cultural concerns can be enhanced by knowledge of and experience in a place. To achieve its purpose, this course will expose students to the following:  The history of wilderness in American culture, including the ongoing political debate about the meaning, value, and place of wilderness/wildness in that culture.  A representative sampling of the writing that has been directly inspired by wilderness experience.  Philosophical ideas directly associated with wilderness experience.  The rudiments of safe and low-impact backcountry travel and the manner in which to engage in that travel most ethically.  The direct experience of legally protects wilderness itself.  An opportunity, however briefly, to experiment with the Thoreavian notion of "living deliberately. To accomplish this purpose, students will be asked to accomplish some reading and writing (of various types). In a version of this course previously offered, the exploration of the literary representation of wilderness over time-from Puritan historians and Enlightenment philosophers; to Thoreau, John Muir, and Theodore Roosevelt; to contemporary poets, novelists and literary journalists-is framed by reading Roderick Nash's standard history of wilderness in the United States, Wilderness and the American Mind
MATH 435: Basic Abstract Algebra	3 Credits	Literature written in English from countries that were once part of European empires, e.g., India, Canada, South Africa, and others.
MATH 436: Linear Algebra	3 Credits	Literature written in English from countries that were once part of the British Empire or some other European empire., e.g., India, Canada, South Africa, and others. 
MATH 436H: Linear Algebra	3 Credits	 Literature and Empire (3) (GH;US;IL)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. English 182A will constitute a wide ranging study of literature written in English, including novels, short stories, poems, plays, and prose, from countries that were once part of the British Empire or some other European empire. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include writers such as Chinua Achebe, Buchi Emecheta, Alan Paton, David Malouf, Robertson Davies, Ngugi Wa Thiongo, J. M. Coetzee, R. K. Narayan, Amitabha Ghosh, Salman Rushdie, Christina Stead, Thomas Keneally, Jill Ker Conway, V. S. Naipaul, Wilson Harris, and Michael Ondaatje. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class, but the course will often discuss matters of race and ethnicity, as well as matters of religion, gender, sexual orientation and global context, where appropriate. The principle emphasis of the works in this course will be the recognition of non-European/non-American societies and the differences between their culture and that of Europeans or Americans. The conflicts generated by clashing cultures will drive the choice of readings. By the end of the course, students will have studied works from a minimum of five different cultural perspectives. This class will also prepare students to consider social and cultural problems from a variety of cultural perspectives. The course may be used as English Major elective credit or as credit towards the English Minor.
MATH 437: Algebraic Geometry	3 Credits	Literature written in English from countries that were once part of the British Empire or some other European empire., e.g., India, Canada, South Africa, and others. 
MATH 441: Matrix Algebra	3 Credits	 Literature and Empire (3) (GH;IL)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. 
MATH 448: Mathematics of Finance	3 Credits	 will constitute a wide-ranging study of literature written in English, including novels, short stories, poems, plays, and prose, from countries that were once part of the British Empire or some other European empire. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include writers such as Chinua Achebe, Buchi Emecheta, Alan Paton, David Malouf, Robertson Davies, Ngugi Wa Thiongo, J. M. Coetzee, R. K. Narayan, Amitabha Ghosh, Salman Rushdie, Christina Stead, Thomas Keneally, Jill Ker Conway, V. S. Naipaul, Wilson Harris, and Michael Ondaatje. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class, but the course will often discuss matters of race and ethnicity, as well as matters of religion, gender, sexual orientation and global context, where appropriate. The principal emphasis of the works in this course will be the recognition of non-European/non-American societies and the differences between their culture and that of Europeans or Americans. The conflicts generated by clashing cultures will drive the choice of readings. By the end of the course, students will have studied works from a minimum of five different cultural perspectives. This class will also prepare students to consider social and cultural problems from a variety of cultural perspectives. Students will be evaluated by means of essays written in and out of class, essay exams, term-long reading journals, and class participation. Students should expect to complete a minimum of three written assignments in the course of the term. The course may be used as English Major elective credit or as credit towards the English Minor and will be offered once a year, when staffing restrictions permit, with 35 seats per offering.
MATH 449: Applied Ordinary Differential Equations	3 Credits	The course will focus on the history and politics of the Cold War and its depiction in literature and film, especially in British and American literature, but also in that of other countries. Students will read political science and history texts, novels, short stories, and poetry, and view films. Students will analyze the reasons that the Cold War has been and continues to be a major inspiration for literary production and a transformative influence on literary style. Students will be encouraged to explore alternative methodologies for research on cold war topics including the use of primary sources, for ex. documents from the intelligence community archives that have since been declassified. In addition to a class field trip, students will be encouraged to make additional site visits to appropriate institutions in U.S. intelligence history. They'll be making a series of visits to relevant sites.
MATH 450: Mathematical Modeling	3 Credits	Adventure Literature (ENG 183Z) students not only read Thoreau, but like him, they travel to the mountains, the river, or the seashore; they hike, climb, and/or kayak; they interview residents with a stake in the area; and they synthesize their experiences through writing. In this course, students analyze works of fiction, poetry, and nonfiction (including scientific and historical texts) that interrogate human relationships with a specific natural environment or region. As part of the course, students visit the region that inspires that literaturethey explore its wild places on foot and/or by water, and meet authors, activists, and experts invested in its continued legacy. The course combines physical adventure with intellectual rigor; students of all majors will hone their writing and close reading abilities, enhance their analytical and integrative thinking skills, and gain unique insight into diverse US values, traditions, beliefs, and customs rooted in place and environmental practice. This linked course is listed concurrently and must be taken with 
MATH 451: Numerical Computations	3 Credits	/
MATH 455: Introduction to Numerical Analysis I	3 Credits	 (Outdoor Pursuits) in the same semester.
MATH 455H: Introduction To Numerical Analysis I	3 Credits	The desire to tell stories and to be told stories is one of the most basic human needs, and all cultures have been defined in part by the stories they hear and the stories they tell. We are not born, however, knowing how to read the short story - or any fiction for that matter. Rather it is a skill that one acquires and must practice over time. To this end, we will explore the historical development of the short story genre throughout the world, and we will examine how historical contexts relate to the content and style of the stories under discussion. We may pay particular attention to short story cycles - groups of short stories published together in one volume. We will become familiar with how individual stories are put together and with the vocabulary that is used to discuss fiction - terms such as plot, narrative, character, tone, language, closure, irony, imagery, and so forth.
MATH 456: Introduction to Numerical Analysis II	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Development of the modern novel in the last century (outside the British Isles and the United States); lectures, discussions, readings in translation. 
MATH 457: Introduction to Mathematical Logic	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 / 
MATH 465: Number Theory	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	 The Modern Novel in World Literature (3) (GH) (BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. In this course, students will read examples of the modern novel from around the world. Focusing on novels written outside of America and England, this class will explore the development of the modern novel as a genre across a number of world cultures. As an example, moving from the beginnings of literary modernism (the late nineteenth century) through the early and mid twentieth century, the course will consider works by writers such as the following: Chinua Achebe, Italo Calvino, Albert Camus, Simone deBeauvior, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Isak Dinesen, Marguerite Duras, Natalia Ginzburg, Herman Hesse, James Joyce, Thomas Mann, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Kenzaburo Oe, and Marcel Proust. This course will address the ways in which the world novels under consideration constitute examples of various literary forms and styles. The class will examine the differences and distances between literary movements such as social realism and magical realism, modernism and postmodernism. The goals of this course will be to hone students' critical reading and writing skills while granting them the ability to think about the modern novel as a distinct genre in a comparative global context. This course will help students to develop the analytical skills necessary to analyze complex written texts..
MATH 467: Factorization and Primality Testing	1-9 Credits/Maximum of 9	Playwrights who set the world's stage for twentieth-century drama; issues that continue to shape the contemporary theatrical world.  CMLIT (ENGL) 189 The Founders of Modern Drama (3) (GH)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. CMLIT/
MATH 467H: Factorization and Primality Testing	3 Credits	 will constitute a wide-ranging study of plays by authors often credited with the making of modernist drama. The class will approach these plays from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include writers such as Ibsen, Strindberg, Chekhov, Shaw, Wilde, Galsworthy, O'Neill, Beckett, and Yeats. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class but may include a chronological introduction to the development of modern drama, a consideration of a principal theme or themes in modern drama through a number of plays, or a consideration of plays in the context of historical events or formal or aesthetic elements. Time allotted for the study of the works under consideration will vary. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in dramatic literature as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts. The course may be used as an English or Comparative Literature major credit or as credit toward the English or Comparative Literature minor.
MATH 468: Mathematical Coding Theory	3 Credits	In English 190Q / 
MATH 470: Algebra for Teachers	3 Credits	 students will gain an understanding of medievalism, defined by Leslie J. Workman in 1987 as "the study of the Middle Ages, the application of medieval models to contemporary needs, and the inspiration of the Middle Ages in all forms of art and thought." As this definition suggests, understanding medievalismand, thus, the popular works students know, such as Game of Thrones and Lord of the Ringsbenefit from learning something about the Middle Ages and the reach of its re-mediation across various kinds of expression. Therefore, 
MATH 471: Geometry for Teachers	3 Credits	 / 
MATH 475Y: History of Mathematics	3 Credits	 begins by introducing students to medieval works and a few of the forms that characterize it. More particularly, the medieval works to be studied are those combining more than one genre, media, and/or form. For example, students will read and listen to (or sing!) medieval lyrics, read and perform short medieval plays such as Robin Hood, be introduced to manuscripts of the bestiary with its illuminations, historiated letters, and scribal copying. They also will be introduced to Romanesque and Gothic architecture The first medievalist remediations--works adapted in other media--to be examined will be Book I of Spenser's Faerie Queene, with the woodcut of the Redcrosse Knight and Dryden/Purcell's King Arthur, which will introduce students to Early Modern English medievalism and how it reflects prevailing values in new combinations of old and new artistic forms. Still greater emphasis will be placed on the English Medieval Revival of the nineteenth century, including John Ruskin and the PreRaphaelites poetry, paintings, and essays, as well as William Morris's poetry, painting and Arts and Crafts Movement. Then, as now, medievalism served multiple purposes, including aesthetic, political, and social. To put into practice what students learn and to engage their creativity, one assignment involves hand crafting an art project to be accompanied by an artist statement. In the last part of the course, the focus shifts to contemporary medievalist arts and theory. In keeping with the contemporary direction, another assignment asks students to remediate their handcrafted medievalist work, or to create a new one, using digital resources to engage both their creativity and understanding of key medievalist concepts.
MATH 479: Special and General Relativity	3 Credits	As a genre of literature, science fiction enables human beings to model themselves as a cosmic species, a life form that imagines and inhabits an entirely new scale of being. No longer confined to a tribe, nation or tradition, science fiction narrates and explores the galactic magnitudes of both the external world of astronomical exploration (billions and billions of stars) and the inner world of subjective reality and imagination (billions and billions of neurons). This course introduces students to the surprisingly long history of science fiction as a way of exploring both the microcosm and the macrocosm, mapping a species imagining themselves into the future.
MATH 482: Mathematical Methods of Operations Research	3 Credits	Perhaps more than any other genre of speculative fiction, fantasy is richly varied. This course examines the development of literary traditions in fantasy literature from their earliest origins in mythology and folklore, through the historical development of classic fantasy works, into the books, movies and other fictions of the modern day. The course also explores different critical and theoretical approaches to the student of fantasy literature and related artistic traditions, as surrealism and magical realism.
MATH 484: Linear Programs and Related Problems	3 Credits	This course combines the literary analysis of comics and graphic novels with the creative practice of making comics. Students will learn through an integrated and ongoing process of interpreting select comics texts and also making their own work in that same medium. Students will gain a technical vocabulary for discussing and assessing comics, which they will then apply to formal analysis of compositional and narrative elements in select assigned texts. This analysis will occur first in class discussion, facilitated by the instructors, and then through a sequence of individual written assignments. At the same time, students will receive formal instruction in making comics as they create their own work over the course of the semester, workshopping with peers and instructors as a way of gaining further insight into the creative and technical processes of the studied texts. Formal analysis and creative work will be coordinated and progressive across the course of the semester. The culmination of this collaborative learning would be an integrated understanding and appreciation of comics art.
MATH 485: Graph Theory	1 Credits/Maximum of 3	Short stories, novels, poetry, drama, and essays by English, American, and other English-speaking women writers. ENGL (WMNST) 194 Women Writers (3) (GH;US;IL)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. English 194 will constitute a wide ranging study of works by American, British, and other English-speaking women writers, including novels, short stories, poems, plays, and prose. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include writers such as Bradstreet, Wollstonecraft, C. Rosefti, M. Shelley, Austen, C. Bronte, E. Bronte, G. Eliot, D. Wordsworth, Dickinson, Wharton, Stowe, Freeman, Jewett, Fuller, H.D., Moore, Sitwell, Bishop, Brooks, Plath, Cather, Woolf, Stein, Lessing, Bowen, O'Connor, Welty, Porter, Oates, Olsen, Sarton, Gordimer, Atwood, Morrison, Kinkaid, McCarthy, and Churchill. The course seeks to make students aware of the extensive body of literature written by women through the analysis, evaluation, and appreciation of specific works by women writers. The course also seeks to help students understand the female perspectives-the varying values and interests of women--reflected in the texts at hand and to position these perspectives within wider social, historical, and political contexts. The course also seeks to make students aware of the special problems faced by both women writers and the female inhabitants of the societies they describe in their work. As a course in women's literature, ENGL/
MATH 486: Mathematical Theory of Games	1 Credits/Maximum of 3	 concerns itself with questions of gender. In so far as some of these women writers are black or women of color, it concerns itself with questions of race and ethnicity. In as far as the course looks at women's literature in the context of men's literature, it is concerned with the inter-relationship between dominant (male) and non-dominant (female) culture in the United States as well as in Britain. In so far as the course covers lesbian writers, it is concerned with sexual orientation. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of women's literature, a consideration of a principle theme or themes common to women's literature through a number of works from across a number of historical periods, a consideration of a number of women's works in the context of historical events central to their creation, a consideration of a number of women's works in the context of formal or aesthetic elements common to those works and their various effects. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in women's literature as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts.
MATH 494: Research Project	2 Credits/Maximum of 6	Short stories, novels, poetry, drama, and essays by English, American, and other English-speaking women writers.  
MATH 494H: Thesis Project	2 Credits/Maximum of 6	 Women Writers (3) (GH;US;IL;FYS)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. English 194 will constitute a wide ranging study of works by American, British, and other English-speaking women writers, including novels, short stories, poems, plays, and prose. The class will approach this literature from a variety of thematic, historical, and/or generic vantages. Authors under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include writers such as Bradstreet, Wollstonecraft, C. Rosefti, M. Shelley, Austen, C. Bronte, E. Bronte, G. Eliot, D. Wordsworth, Dickinson, Wharton, Stowe, Freeman, Jewett, Fuller, H.D., Moore, Sitwell, Bishop, Brooks, Plath, Cather, Woolf, Stein, Lessing, Bowen, O'Connor, Welty, Porter, Oates, Olsen, Sarton, Gordimer, Atwood, Morrison, Kinkaid, McCarthy, and Churchill. The course seeks to make students aware of the extensive body of literature written by women through the analysis, evaluation, and appreciation of specific works by women writers. The course also seeks to help students understand the female perspectives-the varying values and interests of women--reflected in the texts at hand and to position these perspectives within wider social, historical, and political contexts. The course also seeks to make students aware of the special problems faced by both women writers and the female inhabitants of the societies they describe in their work. As a course in women's literature, ENGL/
MATH 495: Internship	2 Credits	 concerns itself with questions of gender. In so far as some of these women writers are black or women of color, it concerns itself with questions of race and ethnicity. In as far as the course looks at women's literature in the context of men's literature, it is concerned with the inter-relationship between dominant (male) and non-dominant (female) culture in the United States as well as in Britain. In so far as the course covers lesbian writers, it is concerned with sexual orientation. Topics under consideration will vary from class to class, but may include a chronological introduction to the development of women's literature, a consideration of a principle theme or themes common to women's literature through a number of works from across a number of historical periods, a consideration of a number of women's works in the context of historical events central to their creation, a consideration of a number of women's works in the context of formal or aesthetic elements common to those works and their various effects. Time allofted for the study of the works under consideration will vary. This class will prepare students for advanced courses in women's literature as well as other academic courses that engage in the verbal and written analysis of complex written texts. Students will be evaluated by means of essays written in and out of class, essay exams, term-long reading journals, and class participation. Students should expect to complete a minimum of three written assignments in the course of the term. The course may be used as English Major elective credit or as credit towards the English Minor and will be offered once a year with 60 seats per offering.
MATH 496: Independent Studies	2 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject that may be topical or of special interest.
MATH 496A: **SPECIAL TOPICS**	3 Credits	Formal course given on a topical or special interest subject offered infrequently; several different topics may be taught in one year or semester. This Special Topics is an Inter-Domain GH/GHW GenEd course.
MATH 496H: Independent Studies	3 Credits	Formal courses given infrequently to explore, in depth, a comparatively narrow subject which may be topical or of special interest.
MATH 497: Special Topics	3 Credits	Studies in English language and/or literature.
MATH 499: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	Responses to a variety of literary texts written in English that evoke different approaches.
STAT 100: Statistical Concepts and Reasoning	3 Credits	Responses to a variety of literary texts written in English that evoke different approaches.
STAT 184: Introduction to R	3 Credits	Responses to a variety of literary texts written in English that evoke different approaches.  
STAT 199: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	 Introduction to Critical Reading (3)(BA) This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. When we read a work of literature, how do we determine what it means? Why do readers and critics come up with different interpretations of the same work? How do we decide if a literary work is valuable or not? This course addresses these and other questions by introducing students to the variety of literary questions on which critics and scholars base their interpretations of literature. Each theory poses different questions about a literary text's meanings and focuses our attention on different aspects of a text's language and background. We will examine the theory and practice the application of the following schools of criticism: formalism, psychoanalytic criticism, new historicism, Marxism, and feminism. We will apply different methods to particular literary texts, and students will practice different types of approaches in in-class writing assignments as well as in four papers (4-5 pages each). At the end of the semester, each student will put together a portfolio containing careful revisions of three of those papers as well as an introductory commentary of 1-2 pages.
STAT 200: Elementary Statistics	3 Credits	
STAT 240: Introduction to Biometry	3 Credits	 What is Literature acquaints students with theory and practice relevant to studies of narrative, lyric poetry, and drama. This course meets the Bachelor of Arts degree requirements. English 201 will familiarize students with theories and practices that are foundational for thinking about literature, and for studying narrative fiction, poetry, and drama. The course will pose such questions as what is narrative fiction?; what is poetry?; what is drama?; It will introduce students to how conventions of literary genres operate, how they generate meaning, and how they require and manipulate reader's responses. English 201 will also encourage students to explore whether or not literary discourse, as instanced in the genres that have been named, can be distinguished from other written or spoken discourses. While asking such questions, the course will acquaint students with technical vocabularies used by literary scholars and literary historians, and will provide students with sample scholarly rationales for hypothesizing the singularity of literary discourse, for constructing literary history, and for understanding literature's relation to life. It will teach students close analytic practices of reading, both those that have shaped the discipline of English studies and those emerging currently. The course will be required of all English majors and will be a part of their 36 credit degree requirement.
STAT 250: Introduction to Biostatistics	3 Credits	
STAT 296: Independent Studies	3 Credits	 will familiarize students with theories and practices that are foundational for thinking about literature and for studying narrative fiction, poetry, and drama. The course will pose such questions as "what is narrative fiction?" "what is poetry?" and "what is drama?" It will introduce students to how conventions of literary genres operate, how they generate meaning, and how they require and manipulate readers responses. English 201H will also encourage students to explore whether or not literary discourse, as instanced in the genres that have been named, can be distinguished from other written or spoken discourses. While asking such questions, the course will acquaint students with technical vocabularies used by literary scholars and literary historians, and will provide students with sample scholarly rationales for hypothesizing the singularity of literary discourse, for constructing literary history, and for understanding literature's relation to life. It will teach students close analytic practices of reading, both those that have shaped the discipline of English studies and those emerging currently. As an honors course, 
STAT 297: Special Topics	3 Credits	 will introduce students to how conventions of literary genres operate, how they generate meaning, and how they require and manipulate readers' responses. English 201H will also encourage students to explore whether or not literary discourse, as instanced in particular genres, can be distinguished from other written or spoken discourses. While asking such questions, the course will acquaint students with technical vocabularies used by literary scholars and literary historians, and will provide students with sample scholarly rationales for hypothesizing the singularity of literary discourse, for constructing literary history, and for understanding literature's relation to life. It will teach students close analytic practices of reading, both those that have shaped the discipline of English studies and those emerging currently. Students can expect to take a highly engaged role in seminar-style discussion, including prepared presentations intended to provide a basis for that session's discussion, and which may both draw on, and emerge from, written work for the course.
STAT 300: Statistical Modeling I	3 Credits	
STAT 301: Statistical Analysis I	3 Credits	 introduces students to the types of writing that social scientists typically do in the workplace, including research proposals, proper citation practices, literature reviews, and research reports. In discussing writing and writing activities, this class will focus on some of the more common forms of social science research - among them, experiments, interviews, observations, and surveys. Students will learn to formulate ideas and create coherent pieces of writing from the research they have conducted and read about. In short, this course will introduce students to a variety of writing and research strategies from which they can begin to develop their own identity as a social scientist. (A student may take only one course for credit from 
STAT 318: Elementary Probability	3 Credits	, 
STAT 319: Applied Statistics in Science	3 Credits	, 
STAT 380: Data Science Through Statistical Reasoning and Computation	3 Credits	, and 
STAT 399: Foreign Studies	3 Credits	.)
STAT 401: Experimental Methods	3 Credits	Instruction in writing persuasive arguments about significant issues in the humanities. (A student may take only one course for credit from 
STAT 414: Introduction to Probability Theory	3 Credits	, 
STAT 415: Introduction to Mathematical Statistics	3 Credits	, 
STAT 416: Stochastic Modeling	3 Credits	, and 
STAT 418: Introduction to Probability and Stochastic Processes for Engineering	3 Credits	.) 
STAT 418H: Probability	3 Credits	 Advanced Writing in the Humanities encourages students to develop professional writing skills most likely required in humanities careers. These writing modes include professional materials and then a wider range of writing projects that may include a professional narrative, analysis of a controversy, argumentation, persuasion, and synthesis. Students may analyze a wide-variety of texts - both verbal, digital, and visual -  to learn skillful argumentation with advanced writing techniques.
STAT 440: Computational Statistics	3 Credits	Writing for students in scientific and technical disciplines. (A student may take only one course for credit from 
STAT 460: Intermediate Applied Statistics	3 Credits	, 
STAT 461: Analysis of Variance	3 Credits	, 
STAT 462: Applied Regression Analysis	3 Credits	, and 
STAT 463: Applied Time Series Analysis	3 Credits	.) 
STAT 464: Applied Nonparametric Statistics	3 Credits	 is an advanced writing course designed to help students in science and engineering develop the writing strategies that they will need to communicate successfully on the job and to help them understand why those strategies are appropriate and effective. A key emphasis will be on the rhetorical principles of effective communication, including context analysis and defining clear, actionable purposes. Students will gain experience with a wide range of technical writing genres, including reports, descriptions, definitions, procedures, job application documents, emails, memos, and web applications. Students will also learn about the importance of document and graphic design, including how best to design communications to maximize their potential for success.
STAT 466: Survey Sampling	3 Credits	Writing reports and other common forms of business communication. (A student may take only one course for credit from 
STAT 470W: Problem Solving and Communication in Applied Statistics	3 Credits	, 
STAT 480: Introduction to SAS	3 Credits	, 
STAT 481: Intermediate SAS for Data Management	3 Credits	, and 
STAT 482: Advanced Topics in SAS	3 Credits	.) 
STAT 483: Statistical  Programming in SAS	3 Credits	 is an advanced writing course designed to help students develop the writing strategies that they will need to write successfully on the job and to help them understand why those strategies are appropriate and effective. A key emphasis will be on rhetorical principles of effective communication, including audience analysis and defining clear, actionable purpose. Students will gain experience with a wide range of business writing genres, including reports, letters, job application documents, emails, memos and web applications like business blogs, online articles, social media profiles and personal branding. Students will also learn about the importance of document design, including how best to utilize headings, page layout, graphics and other visuals to maximize the potential for communication success.
